Grand Challenges for Archaeology - Crowd Sourcing Report
Author(s) / Editor(s): Keith Kintigh Published: Tempe, Arizona: The Digital Archaeological Record. 2013 Document Type: book Stable URL: http://core.tdar.org/document/391233 DOI: doi:10.6067/XCV8R78G30

Downloaded: by Ben Marwick on 4/22/14 10:19 AM

Your use of tDAR indic cates your acc ceptance of th he Terms & C Conditions of Use, availabl le at http://www w.tdar.org/sup pport/policies/ /term-of-use/. . tDAR is an international digital repository develope ed and maint tained by the Center for Di igital Antiquity y, a not-for-pr rofit organizat tion that helps s scholars, researche ers, educators s and student ts, and interes sted members s of the gene eral public dis scover, use, a and preserve a wide range e of informatio on about arch haeology and archaeologic cal resources. . For more informatio on about the Center C for Dig gital Antiquity, , visit our web b site http://digitalantiquity. .org. For mor re informatio on about tDAR R, see http://w www.tdar.org g. We welcom me your comm ments via ema ail at comments s@tdar.org or phone at 48 80-965-1387.

Grand Challenges for Archaeology ­ Crowd Sourcing Report 
Keith W. Kintigh ­ 21 June 2013    This document reports the results of a crowd sourcing effort to identify the grand challenges facing  contemporary archaeology. The crowd sourcing was accomplished through email requests and  listserv postings by the major North American and European professional associations.  Organizations agreeing to disseminate the request were: American Cultural Resources Association,  Archaeological Institute of America, Institute for Archaeologists (UK), Canadian Archaeological  Association, European Archaeological Association, Paleoanthropology Society, Register of  Professional Archaeologists, Society for American Archaeology, Society for Historical Archaeology,  and World Archaeological Congress. In this request, we asked our colleagues to identify problems  of broad scientific and social interest that could drive cuttingedge research in archaeology for the  next decade and beyond. We received input through a Webbased survey (included here) that  sought a concise statement of a grand challenge problem or question and, optionally, a justification  of the importance of the problem and demographic information for the respondent. Survey results  from 1 April 2012 to 30 June 2012, were analyzed. An additional 5 responses were received prior to  20 June 2013 are included here, but not in the demographic summary of the respondents.    The body of this report consists of the text of the challenge and justification provided by the  respondents.  The challenge and justification text are provided verbatim with the exception that  obvious misspellings and some obvious grammatical problems were corrected, British spellings  were Americanized, and  occasional information identifying the author of the entry was deleted.  For presentation, I have organized the entries and assigned brief topical labels. These  organizational elements are all afterthefact additions and had no bearing on the responses.     The purpose of the survey was to identify fundamental problems in science and the text of the  request excluded disciplinary challenges with respect to the practice of archaeology. Nonetheless a  substantial fraction of the responses was focused on the issues of practice.  The scientific questions  and methodological challenges are reported in the first two sections, the issues of practice (with  less organizational detail) in the final section. A summary of the topics--in which one topic may  have several included responses is provided first, followed by the text of the responses, in the same  order. The ID numbers are unique and were randomly assigned in the course of the analysis.      This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No.  1202413.  The idea for this effort was developed by the steering committee for that grant,  composed of by Keith W. Kintigh, Jeffrey H. Altschul, Ann P. Kinzig, W. Fredrick Limp, William K.  Michener, and Jeremy Sabloff.  The survey itself was developed by Keith Kintigh in consultation  with the steering committee.   
Table of Contents  Grand Challenges for Archaeology­ Topical Summary  .......................................................................................  2  Grand Challenge Survey  Responses  ..................................................................................................................  5  Grand Challenges for Archaeology ­ Respondent Demographics .....................................................................  51  Grand Challenges for Archaeology ­ Survey Instrument  .............................................................................52  

1 

Grand Challenges for Archaeology ­ Topical Summary 
  I. Scientific Questions (88)  A. [QA&D] Agriculture & Domestication (9)  [QA&D] Domestication & Sedentism  [QA&D] Origins of Agriculture  [QA&D] Transition from Slash & Burn to Plow Agriculture  [QA&D] Transition to Agriculture in the Americas  B. [QC&C] Conflict & Cooperation (4)  [QC&C] Development of Warfare  [QC&C] How Cooperative Groups are Constituted  C. [QCA] Cultural Affiliation (5)  [QCA] Develop Method & Theory of Understanding Identity Formation and Historical Connections of Groups  [QCA] Tracing Cultural and Biological Relationships  [QCA] Tracing Cultural Relationships  [QCA] Tracing Genetic Relationships and Peoples and Domesticated Plants and Animals of the Americas  [QCA] Understanding Biological Relationships Among Groups  D. [QCC] Climate Change (15)  [QCC] Environmental Events and Organizational Change  [QCC] Frequency and Effects of Asteriod/Comet Strikes  [QCC] Leveraging Past Human Responses to Climate Change  E. [QCH] Culture History (8)  [QCH] [PTP] Development of SW Cultures and Relationship to Traditional Histories  [QCH] Demise of St Lawrence Iroquois  [QCH] Documenting Disappearing Traditional Lifeways  [QCH] Medieval Norse Exploration of North America  [QCH] Oldest Foundations of Civilization  [QCH] Prehistoric Plant & Animal Utilization in MidAtlantic  [QCH] Relationship of Brazilian and Hopewell Earthworks  [QCH] Religious Origins of SE US Mound Builders  F. [QCNH] Coupled Natural & Human Systems (15)  [QCNH] Dynamics of the European Colonization of the Americas  [QCNH] Long term Social & Ecological Dynamics of Major World Regions  [QCNH] Long Term Sustainability  [QCNH] Relationships of Human Population Growth, Technology, and Economy with Benign Sociopolitical  Formations  [QCNH] Sustainability and Waste  [QCNH] Sustainability  [QCNH] Understanding Implications of Cultural Diversity for Sustainability  [QCNH] Understanding Individual and Small Group Decisionmaking at Different Scales  [QCNH] Understanding Long Term Population Growth  [QCNH] Understanding Technological and Economic Transformations  [QCNH] What Drove Population Expansion Across Continents  G. [QOT] Other Theme (8)  [QOT] Social Change  [QOT] Understanding Relationships Among Languages  [QOT] Understanding scale at which the unpredictable behavior of individuals transforms into the more  predictable behavior of groups  [QOT] Understanding Settlement Pattern Change  [QOT] Understanding the Adoption of New Nationalities by Immigrants  2 

[QOT] Understanding the Role of Psychotropics  [QOT] When did humans occupy the high mountain regions of the world?  [QOT] Demography of Early Populations  H. [QPA] Peopling of Americas (9)  [QPA] Explore Submerged Sites  [QPA] First People of NE North America  [QPA] Role of Women and Lifeways in PaleoIndian Period  [QPA] Timing and Origins of Peopling of the Americas  [QPA] Understanding Peopling of the Americas  I. [QPAQ] Paleoanthropology Questions (4)  [QPAQ] Art & the Origins of Human Behavioral Modernity  [QPAQ] Subsistence, technology, and cultural innovations of the earliest anatomically modern humans  [QPAQ] Understanding Demographic Dynamics of Expansion of Modern Humans  J. [QSC] Social Complexity (11)  [QSC] Dynamics of Complex Societies, Technological Development, and Economic Growth  [QSC] Emergence of Leaders with Coercive Force  [QSC] Emergence of Social Hierarchies  [QSC] How Peripheral Populations are Incorporated in Formative States  [QSC] Origin of the Early States  [QSC] Origins of government  [QSC] Relevance of Ancient Urbanism  [QSC] Origin of Cities, Governments, and Civil Society   [QSC] Origin of Cities; Rise and Fall of Cities   [QSC] Using Urban Landscapes to Understand Social Organization  II. Methodological Needs (30)  A. [MDA] Dating (4)  [MDA] Refine Dating Frameworks  [MDA] Chronometric Ceramic Dating  B. [MDACS] Data Access, Comparison & Synthesis (26)  [MDACS] [PIR]  Access to Archaeological Information  [MDACS] Ability to Do Comparative Research  [MDACS] Access to Archaeological Information  [MDACS] Access to Gray Literature  [MDACS] Access to Information on Artifact Collections  [MDACS] Access to Literature  [MDACS] Access to Reports and Data  [MDACS] Archiving and Access  [MDACS] Data Comparability  [MDACS] Data Integration  [MDACS] Data Standards  [MDACS] Importance of Synthesis  [MDACS] Management of Primary Data  [MDACS] National Artifact Database  [MDACS] National Database  [MDACS] Preservation and Access to Data  [MDACS] Unit Comparability  [MDACS] Collaboration within Regions  III. Issues of Practice (77)  A.  [PAEM] Analytical & Excavation Methods (11)  [PAEM] Classification  3 

[PAEM] Excavation Standards  [PAEM] Geospatial Techniques for Subsurface Cultural Resource Discovery  [PAEM] Identifying Natural Resources  [PAEM] Lithic Assemblage Variability  [PAEM] Negative Space in Stratigraphy  [PAEM] Research Design  [PAEM] Research Design  [PAEM] Residues  [PAEM] Taphonomic Processes  [PAEM]Research Design  B. [PDTT] Deficiencies in Theory & Training (19)  C. [PIP] Indigenous Perspectives (5)  D. [PIR] Interdisciplinary Research (4)  E. [PMJG] Money, Jobs & Government (9)  F. [PPRP] Physical Resource Protection (12)  G. [PPE] Public Education & Relevance of Archaeology (17)  IV. Total 186 Responses, 195 Challenges 

4 

Grand Challenges for Archaeology  Responses  I. Scientific Questions 
A. [QA&D] Agriculture & Domestication 
1. [QA&D] Domestication & Sedentism ID: 341   Challenge: What role did domesticated plants and animals play in the development of permanent  village life (the Formative) in the western hemisphere? Was permanence predicated on the  emergence of dependable food supplies, or did the development of dependable food supplies  follow permanence that developed for other reasons?   Justification: We still do not know why people settled down and became farmers and herders in the  New World. The factors and critical resources were apparently different in North, Middle, and South  America. The role of diffusion, especially of maize, north and south out of its heartland in Mexico  needs to be better understood, given its critical importance to later societies. In South America, it is  evident that plants and animals were domesticated in many different regions, then diffused  outward as well, mixing and combining in different regions to led to the Formative. In addition,  marine resources played a critical role in the development in western South America, and perhaps in  Mesoamerica as well. If we are going to understand why people settled down in these regions and  forsook the highly successful hunting and gathering way of life that had existed previously, then  these questions need to be answered. Research on the origins of the Formative has lagged  considerably in recent years, though these questions remain. To understand humanity's shift to this  way of life, we need comparative data from this hemisphere to compare to that of the Old World.  2. [QA&D] Origins of Agriculture ID: 225   Challenge: When, where, how, and why did humans first start to domesticate plants and animals?   Justification: The "Neolithic Revolution" had profound effects on human biology and culture, many  of which we are still trying to comprehend today. Furthermore, the nature of humanenvironment  relations have been forever affected by the adoption of agriculture.  3. [QA&D] Origins of Agriculture ID: 231   Challenge: Provide a detailed chronological framework to aid the better understanding for the  transition from huntergatherer/'subsistence' economies to an agriculturalbased societies across  the globe.   Justification:  4. [QA&D] Origins of Agriculture ID: 273   Challenge: I'd suggest a renewed focus on some of the bigpicture questions that used to drive the  discipline: ¶ Why did people begin farming?    Justification:  5. [QA&D] Origins of Agriculture ID: 313   Challenge: The origin of agriculture (food production) across different regions of the world.   Justification: Human ability to domesticate certain plants and animals represents a major transition  in human history, but the timing, causes and motives of such innovation are less well understood.  6. [QA&D] Origins of Agriculture ID: 364   Challenge: The most important problem facing archaeological researchers is to determine why plant  and animal domestication did not get started until the last 10,000 years, along with how and why it  grew and spread in more recent millennia, and how it came to be indispensable.   Justification: Research has shown that the shift to domesticated plants and animals was not  revolutionary in the sense that it took a long time. The success of modern domestication has led us  to assume without much criticism the idea that the benefits of domestication had to have been  obvious, but the evidence so far suggests otherwise. ¶ Modern humans (homo sapiens sapiens)  have existed for at least 30,000 years but food production was not part of human culture until the  last third of that long period. What took them so long? Boyd and Richerson have had some ideas. I  am guessing that plant cultivation and animal domestication did not occur until circumstances drove  5 

humans in that direction. The circumstances were almost certainly ecological changes brought on by  both climate change and human activity. We know that early modern humans hunted and that  many of the species they hunted dwindled to extinction near or just after the close of the  Pleistocene. Many productive plant species depended upon those animals for seed dispersal, to the  extinctions of the animals led to the contraction of ranges (or worse) for the plants that had  depended upon them. Humans had to adapt to biomass reduction in both the animal kingdom and  the plant kingdom taking over certain roles in species propagation. Consider what would have  happened to avocado or Osage orange trees if humans had not perceived their values. ¶ Recent  research has shown that animal extinctions in Australia occurred soon after (and probably because  of) the arrival of humans there. The evidence grows stronger that the same was the case in North  America, despite the protestations of some of my most experienced colleagues in archaeology. Thus  the question of why plant and animal domestication took so long to occur is almost certainly bound  up with the ecological implications of human predation, global climatic change, the extinction of  certain animal species, and the resulting forces that compelled humans to intervene in plant and  animal biology. This view of ecology, which has humans playing a central if unconscious role for  many millennia, is one that will require enormous coordinated effort to be understood. The eastern  and western hemispheres fortunately provide us with independent comparative laboratories in  which archaeologists and allied researchers in other disciplines can explore this central question.   7. [QA&D] Origins of Agriculture ID: 372   Challenge: Why did humans begin farming?   Justification: Without the food surpluses created by agriculture, civilization would never have  developed. Yet, agriculture introduced poorer diets, created additional strain on the back and joints.  Understanding why humans would undertake an activity that, at least initially, was detrimental to  the health of individual humans is important. Although agriculture might have had a negative effect  on individual humans, it has had a huge positive effect on the human species. Increasing the  numbers to unprecedented level for large animals.  8. [QA&D] Transition from Slash & Burn to Plow Agriculture ID: 332   Challenge: The decision making process by which farming shifts from slash and burn to plow (or  plantation) agriculture is of central importance to the present world and to the development of  complex society in many parts of the Old World. This transition is more than a simple technological  shift, with necessary changes in social organization, notions of property, and demographic choices.   Justification: The transition from slash and burn to plow agriculture was long ago identified by Ester  Boserup, however, it has not been taken as a major axis of cross cultural study (as have plant and  animal domestication, urbanization, etc.). The transition from slash and burn to plow agriculture (or  plantation) is occurring in many parts of the world today, and it is anthropological archaeology that  is best equipped to deal with the multifaceted social aspects of this transition, rather than seeing it  as a question for "development" or "peasant" studies.  9. [QA&D] Transition to Agriculture in the Americas ID: 297   Challenge: Reassessment of the transition to agriculture in the Americas with an emphasis on  identifying the character and duration of mixed (wild and domesticated) subsistence systems in this  process.   Justification: The adoption of intensive agricultural systems in the Americas now seems likely to  have occurred 40006000 years after the initial domestication of maize and other food plants.  Abundant aquatic and terrestrial resources in coastal areas, however, appear to have been capable  of supporting larger complex societies well before the rise of staple based agriculture. In spite of the  growing amount of evidence to suggest that considerable social complexity may have been  supported by mixed horticultural and wild food collection regimes during late Holocene, standard  introductory texts continue to emphasize an older monolithic model of early complexity based on  staple agricultural crops. A grand revision of the transition to agriculture in the Americas seems in  order, particularly given the importance of subsistence mixtures of wild and domesticated foods  6 

now increasing recognized throughout the Holocene worldwide. 

B. [QC&C] Conflict & Cooperation 
1. [QC&C] Development of Warfare ID: 208   Challenge: Development of patterns of warfare in both complex and non complex societies. There  have been an increasing number of studies of patterns of warfare by archaeologists. However, for  the most part, they have been limited in scope to particular regions and/or time periods. The  explanatory models "borrowed" from the field of Ecology have inherent limitations.   Justification: Archaeologists have the unique opportunity to analyze the development of all forms of  human behavior. The manifestation of social conflict in the form of warfare is not well understood.  Why do groups of human beings engage in conflict with each other? Are there definable underlying  causes? How has conflict shaped the course of societal functioning? ¶ If archaeologists can better  understand or explain the causes and consequences of warfare, can this knowledge be applied, such  as to reduce human conflict in the modern world? Probably not, but it could go a long way in helping  us to have a better understanding of the reasons why through the course of human history groups  of people have taken the lives of other people.  2. [QC&C] Development of Warfare ID: 273   Challenge: I'd suggest a renewed focus on some of the bigpicture questions that used to drive the  discipline: ¶ When and why did warfare begin?   Justification:  3. [QC&C] Development of Warfare ID: 289   Challenge: War and peace.   Justification: Social and political violence and war began in deep prehistory, and despite changes in  scale and technology, the prehistory of war has much to say for peace and conflict studies, and for  policy.  4. [QC&C] How Cooperative Groups are Constituted ID: 339   Challenge: To examine the causes and consequences of variation in how human socioeconomic  networks and cooperative groups are constituted. Why are some human groups more inclusive and  equal, while others are characterized by marked inequalities in power and access. What factors  contributed to these different social relations and ties, and how do groups of these different  properties respond/adjust to different challenges, including environmental hazards, intergroup  contacts. To address this kind of question requires broad, crosstemporal and crossspatial sets of  information accessible to archaeology. This focus would expand scientific perspectives on human  cooperation beyond experimental games.   Justification: 

C. [QCA] Cultural Affiliation 
1. [QCA] Develop Method & Theory of Understanding Identity Formation and Historical Connections of  Groups ID: 311   Challenge: I think a grand problem is documenting the historical connection between the ancient  groups that lived in the past and their descendants today. We need to develop the method and  theory to theorize and analyze the material correlates of social identity that underwent substantial  transformations.   Justification: This grand problem arises from the challenge of NAGPRA but transcends that into  intellectual questions about social identity through time and space everywhere on the planet. The  research would have both immediate political relevance and much broader anthropological  significance.  2. [QCA] Tracing Cultural and Biological Relationships ID: 380   Challenge: Illuminating histories of peoples through time, via ethnogenetic (i.e., via the process of  ethnogenesis) trajectories, like Scott G. Ortman did in his Ph.D. dissertation ("Genes, Language and  Culture in Tewa Ethnogenesis, A.D. 11501400", University of Arizona 2010).   Justification: From my experience, we cannot continue to advocate unilaterally for DNA analyses  7 

and other "destructive" scientific assays of human skeletal material, for a number of reasons.  Further, if we are to engage American Indians in archaeological research, a la Indigenous  Archaeology, toward issues and questions of common interest, then we need to prioritize the kind  of research which both Anglo and Indian archaeologists will be interested: the study of population  changes through time and ethnogenesis, from the archaeological past to the historic/protohistoric  present. We simply cannot engage them in this kind of research based on DNA analysis or other  "destructive" assays  it is culturally and morally abhorrent to them. And, at the end of the  proverbial day, DNA (etc.).  which is strictly biological data  is just one line of evidence within one  of the three major groups of evidence (language, biology and material culture patterns). The beauty  of Ortman's research is that it uses language first, archaeological evidence second and non destructive biology effectively and in a way that illuminates the HISTORY of a population in a way  that interests both Anglos and Indians and doesn't alienate either group. We simply need more  studies just like Dr. Ortman's landmark dissertation.  3. [QCA] Tracing Cultural Relationships ID: 369   Challenge: Beyond that, cultural affiliation of the Late Prehistoric period is particularly applicable  today.   Justification: In today's archaeological climate, as well as business environment, with Native  American tribes become more vocal and active in their participation in cultural resource  management, and with the difficulties associated with culturally affiliating human remains, it is  important to attempt to identify cultural groups of the precontact past with those in existence  today. This area of research also allows for testimony when land claim lawsuits are filed.  4. [QCA] Tracing Genetic Relationships and Peoples and Domesticated Plants and Animals of the  Americas ID: 207   Challenge: Genetic relationships among the peoples of the Americas and the plants and animals  they used. This information will help us understand how the continents were settled, population  movements of later prehistory, and trade relationships. Many narratives have been constructed  based on fragmentary data, and a comprehensive effort to understand not only how people moved  into the continents but how they they interacted later on would enable us to better interpret the  stories constructed by both archaeologists and native populations.   Justification: To understand our deep history, we require empirical data about ourselves. One  important source for this data comes from our genes and the genetic makeup of the plants and  animals we have used in past times. Presently, we often refer to the tales documented by the first  explorers and settlers, but these are commonly distorted by the political, social, and economic  circumstances of the emerging colonial experience; thus, information that is entirely independent of  these stories would be particularly relevant to the study of populations movements both into and  within the territory of the Americas. This data could help us differentiate between constructed  legends and historical reality, and in addition, generate new ideas and ways of looking at the long term human past.  5. [QCA] Understanding Biological Relationships Among Groups ID: 345   Challenge: What is the genetic relationship between ancient skeletal remains?   Justification: Human bones contain the data to demonstrate historical relationships, and the lack of  a relationship, between ancient populations. Archaeologists would benefit from reliable ways of  identifying ancient relationships, quickly and reliably, as demonstrated by the analysis of ancient  bones, and with minimal disturbance to the preservation of the bones themselves. 

D. [QCC] Climate Change 
1. [QCC] Environmental Events and Organizational Change ID: 228   Challenge: What is the role of abrupt environmental events on the rise and collapse of ancient  states?   Justification: Researchers across a broad range of fields now study global climatic change, and a  large group of those researchers are concerned with longterm change. Archaeologists are uniquely  8 

2.

3.

4.

5.

positioned to study the dynamics between shortterm and longterm climatic variability and  organizational change. In several of the world's regions, interdisciplinary research has investigated  the nature of longterm environmental variability and human organizational response. In some of  the world's beststudied arid regions, archaeologists have suggested direct correlations between  abrupt climatic events (volcanic eruptions, earthquakes, mud slides, and protracted droughts are  some examples). In most cases, they have focused on a single geographic region (or cluster of  related societies or states) in such work. Few archaeologists, however, have engaged in the kind of  longterm, macroregional research needed to understand conditions under which different kinds of  societies respond directly to abrupt environmental events. Some regions of the world experienced  both longterm environmental instability inherent in their climatic regimes (particularly in the  tropics) and a series of shortterm climatic events; one of these is Southeast Asia. Although some  archaeologists and historians have directly linked the rise and fall of particular states to individual  volcanic eruptions or drought regimes, no archaeologist has yet worked on the macroregional scale  necessary to also incorporate social factors like peerpolity relations, imperial expansions to the east  and north, and unrelated shifts in trade networks.  [QCC] Frequency and Effects of Asteriod/Comet Strikes ID: 315   Challenge: 2. Seek archaeological evidence bearing on the probability of asteroid/comet strikes on  the earth over the last ca. 10,000 years and use to elucidate their frequency and effects.   Justification: 2. Bruce Masse at Sandia Labs has conducted some fascinating interdisciplinary  research on this question. While archaeology obviously cannot do much to ward off asteroid/comet  strikes, it could help clarify how often they happen and how widespread and serious their effects  have been in the past, as a basis for refining predictions about future hazards.  [QCC] Leveraging Past Human Responses to Climate Change ID: 234   Challenge: All over North America the midHolocene experienced climate change of a magnitude on  par with what we may experience in the next couple f centuries. These events of 80005000 years  ago are our best laboratory and archaeology is the keystone discipline for understanding human  response. We propose a continentwide research effort to create a multiscalar model.   Justification: The last greatest global climate event analogous in magnitude to changes foreseen in  the next few centuries was the midHolocene Altithermal/Hypsithermal. Environmental change  affected all biomes, from the deserts of the Great Basin to the WoodlandPrairie interface, to the  coasts and pine barrens. Knowing what actually happened requires that archaeology step up and be  central to coordinating research, because archaeology is essential to understanding environmental  proxies and because only archaeology can provide the information on human response. In addition  to targeted local and regional data gathering, the effort will involve a continentwide collation of  archaeological site file data and over a hundred thousand existing reports in the gray literature. A  spinoff benefit will be a revolution in the capacity of every practitioner to access, know, and use  this vast body of unexplored data.  [QCC] Leveraging Past Human Responses to Climate Change ID: 241   Challenge: Understanding how past climate change has effected cultural adaptations,  demographics, and population movements to better predict the reaction to future climate change.   Justification: Environment and its constantly changing nature provide the driver for natural  selection. Humans are not exempt from this selection and our extant cultures reflect cultural  adaptations to changing environments, which also must be considered within their historical  context. Archaeology plays an important role in helping understand human cultural, biological, and  demographic adaptations to climate change.  [QCC] Leveraging Past Human Responses to Climate Change ID: 256   Challenge: Focus on past impacts of climate change on society as well as sustainable practices with  the goal to cull lessons useful at present.   Justification: We need to go beyond platitudes regarding 'lessons from the past' and provide  concrete cases and solutions. Not only might this approach help solve the problems we increasingly  9 

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

face in view of global climate change, decreasing resources, and growing populations. We also need  to increasingly justify archaeology; thus, taking the above direction will address two problems at  once.  [QCC] Leveraging Past Human Responses to Climate Change ID: 269   Challenge: Reconstruct paleoclimate change and human responses to it over large geographies and  during different periods of significant climate change in order to anticipate challenges posed by  global warming in the modern world.   Justification: We are entering into a period of unprecedented climate changebrought about largely  by the products of our own cultural practices. But the peoples of the past also faced periods of  dramatic change in terms of sea level fluctuation, temperature, ecology, etc. and the decisions they  made in grappling with the new conditions they faced may be of interest in the modern world. Of  particular interest should be broadscale shifts in a regional ecology (species representation,  diversity, population levels, etc.) and implications for humans in that environment.  [QCC] Leveraging Past Human Responses to Climate Change ID: 278   Challenge: Human Adaptation to Climate Change   Justification: The archaeological record is replete with data from human behavior as well as  contextual geoarchaeological and paleoenvironmental data to investigate humanenvironment  interaction relative to continually changing climate regimes. Like a mirror flipped into the future,  responses and interactions over the past few million years may contribute to adaptive strategies for  imminent humaninduced climate change in the near future.  [QCC] Leveraging Past Human Responses to Climate Change ID: 287   Challenge: Identifying the social, cultural and demographic impacts of earlier climate change and  other major environmental change episodes, world wide.   Justification: Earlier climate change episodes, and the adaptations that allowed local populations to  survive them, or their failure to do so, can inform our reactions to present environmental changes.  Examples might include the northern European Little Ice Age, or its preceding climatic optimum.  Major environmental change episodes, including disasters such as pandemics, tsunamis floods and  droughts, and their impact upon populations, may help us to assess the potential impact of the  predicted increasing numbers of such events over the next few decades. This is an area where taking  the archaeological long view has clear and immediate benefits for modern society.  [QCC] Leveraging Past Human Responses to Climate Change ID: 312   Challenge: Human populations have undergone longterm social and cultural evolutionary changes,  sometimes in response to changing climatic factors such as rising or falling sea levels, shifts in  Holocene climates throughout the world. The challenge is to document the effects of longterm  climatic change on human populations, from those who participated in foraging, to the early  development of farming, and to the rise of urban communities.   Justification: 1. The past can inform the present with respect to humanenvironment interactions as  related to earlier episodes of climatic change and possible environmental degradation. ¶ 2. How  smallscale human populations were resilient to the effects of natural disasters, environmental  perturbations, and climatic change may be modeled using computational methods. ¶ 3.  Archaeologists working across all areas of the globe have these kinds of information through the  finegrained analyses  of human systems. ¶ 4. We are now in the position to collect these data from  archaeologists and place these data within the scope of measurable paleoproxies from ice or sea  cores, pollen records, temperature and moisture records, treering data, rates of sedimentation and  erosion.  [QCC] Leveraging Past Human Responses to Climate Change ID: 314   Challenge: 1. Predict the effects of global climate change in different regions of the world by  determining how such change has affected human society, economy and history in the past.   Justification: 1. This is a question that others and I explored briefly in the 1980s as part of an  abortive initiative to establish "National Archaeological Research Topics" to guide the expenditure of  10 

11.

12.

13.

14.

federal and other moneys on archaeological data recovery under the National Historic Preservation  Act and other authorities. Archaeological evidence is pretty clear for climate change and its effects  in different parts of North America, and doubtless is in other parts of the world as well. The beauty  of archaeology as a predictive tool (relative to things like seabottom cores, ice cores, etc.) is that it  can elucidate how large scale climate change (e.g. global warming) is expressed regionally/locally,  and how it affects human societies. Thus archaeology can contribute to a more nuanced  understanding of such change.  [QCC] Leveraging Past Human Responses to Climate Change ID: 327   Challenge: Assessing the impact of major and minor climate change and extreme weather events on  ancient human societies in the context of today's and future concerns about the impact of longterm  warming on the world.   Justification: Climate change is one of the major issues facing humanity in a world that is  increasingly crowded, with tens of millions of people extremely vulnerable to a projected high  incidence of extreme weather events like tropical cyclones, also to tsunamis and other natural  phenomena that affect coastline populations, this quite apart from rising sea levels and the effects  of major volcanic eruptions on humanity (i.e. the summer of AD 1816). The ongoing revolution in  paleoclimatology, especially that in the study of treerings and ice cores (the study of which is  becoming very refined and will become even more so in the future), have turned archaeologists'  attention to the impact of climate change on ancient societies in ways that go far beyond the  climatic determinism of earlier decades. A multidisciplinary archaeology has an enormous  contribution to make to future debates and policy initiatives surrounding global climate change in a  world which is facing mass climatic refugee problems. Such research requires close cooperation with  other sciences, for it is the combination of both the scientific evidence and the human aspects of the  problem that are central to future debates on climate change. Until recently, people were almost  invariably omitted from the climatic change equation, and certainly the ancient climate change  equation. Archaeology, with its unique ability to study human cultural adaptations and changes over  long periods of time, has a central role in such research, which, among other things, will involve the  management and deployment of enormous quantities of primary data.  [QCC] Leveraging Past Human Responses to Climate Change ID: 337   Challenge: How have responses to environmental and climate change shaped the development of  past human societies? To what extent has environmental change in the past been the product of  human activity, and how have the choices we've made to work with or against these changes  affected the course of history?   Justification: Climate change, anthropogenic or otherwise, is a major concern in the modern world.  In the past, it may have been just as important. In Iceland, for example, massive environmental  degradation resulted from unfettered resource exploitation. Current research into the origins of  agriculture is is suggesting further ties to global climate events. By understanding how social and  economic practices both shaped and were shaped by environmental change in the past, we can  improve the ways in which we enact positive change in our own modern society as part of a dynamic  global ecosystem.  [QCC] Leveraging Past Human Responses to Climate Change ID: 374   Challenge: Document the nature and timing of climate change, and the nature of human responses  (adaptive or otherwise) to climate change.   Justification:  [QCC] Leveraging Past Human Responses to Climate Change ID: 382   Challenge: Effects of climate change on human societies, especially complex societies, in longterm  global perspective.   Justification: Current geological, climatological and archaeological data support the visibility of at  least three and probably four natural cycles of climate change: (1) the 100,000 year Ice Age cycle  through the Pleistocene (the Holocene is an interglacial); (2) Probably a 6000 year cycle of which the  11 

Altithermal/Hypsithermal/Jomon Transgression/Scandinavian Mesolithic high sea stands represent a  high part of the cycle; (3) a 600 year cycle, exemplified by the Roman Optimum, Vandic Minimum,  Medieval Optimum, Little Ice Age, and modern optimum are examples; and (4) a 70 year cycle,  which we experience in a human lifetime (remember discussions of the coming ice age in the  1970s?). Charting the 600year cycle against the rise and fall of northern hemisphere complex  societies makes it clear that this cycle has a profound impact on complex societies, as do  punctuations such as the AD 536 event which reorganized the complex societies of the word.  Modern climate change is driven in part by the natural cycles and in part by modern human activity  such as burning fossil fuels. This perspective has profound policy implications: we need to stop  polluting, but even if we do, we cannot stop the natural cycles. We have to plan to adapt, and invest  in infrastructure, not obfuscation. The long term view of climate and society puts the current trends  in perspective and also makes sense to broad audiences who are tired of the oppositional sound bite simplicity of the popular media. This topic also fits well into Hardesty's (2007 American  Anthropologist) call for an emphasis on global change archaeology. This makes archaeology relevant  and could affect national policy if presented well.  15. [QCC] Leveraging Past Human Responses to Climate Change ID: 383   Challenge: The role climate change plays in creation and collapse of cultures and civilizations.   Justification: As modern humanity faces global climate change humans will be faced with many  climate related challenges. For example, rising sea levels may cause coastal migration and large  numbers of refugees. Long term shifts in rainfall will change the currently available arable land  (some areas will see and increase some a decrease). ¶ How have past civilizations been helped by  climate change and how have they been hindered? How quickly has the climate changed in the  past? And how quickly does this change affect a culture/civilization. Archaeology is in a unique  position to answer these questions. Examining past growth and collapse of various cultural centers  like Choco Canyon or Cahokia many help answer these questions. ¶ Looking at the long term change  in climate in North America (from pollen data or preserved plant remains) can help today's people  understand how quick climate can change in region, and what effect these changes will have on a  region. Archaeological data can be used to examining both large and small scale effects. 

E. [QCH] Culture History 
1. [QCH] [PTP] Development of SW Cultures and Relationship to Traditional Histories ID: 216   Challenge: Development of the major prehistoric cultures of the American Southwest, including the  timing and origin (local vs. migration vs. both) of genetic and cultural populations and how these  groups correlate with oral history of modern tribes (e.g.. migration traditions).   Justification: Archaeologists have developed stories about the origin and development of prehistoric  populations that may or may not correspond to traditional histories of modern tribal groups. It is in  the interest of both groups (archaeologists and tribes) to explore where those sometimes disparate  stories overlap and intertwine and where they diverge because there is useful and valid information  to be gained from both perspectives. There can never to a complete correspondence among the  various stories and traditions but any robust interpretation of the past must consider all lines of  evidence. This type of cooperation also has the potential to decrease animosity among researchers  from various backgrounds, which will in turn improve future collaboration.  2. [QCH] Demise of St Lawrence Iroquois ID: 236   Challenge: What happened to the Saint Lawrence Iroquois and what happened to them?   Justification: Saint Lawrence Iroquois pottery is found on the east shore of Lake Champlain as far  south as Cornwall, VT and as far east as the Old Point point bar formation on the Kennebec River in  Maine. What was the extent of their culture area, its duration and what happened to them?  3. [QCH] Documenting Disappearing Traditional Lifeways ID: 360   Challenge: 2  The disappearance of traditional lifeways with direct links to the prehistoric past in  many parts of the world.   Justification: Although excellent ethnoarchaeological study of many important traditional activities  12 

4.

5.

6.

7.

have been undertaken over the past half century, much more remains to be done. Once again, time  is of the essence as many of these surviving traditional lifeways are disappearing at an accelerating  pace.  [QCH] Medieval Norse Exploration of North America ID: 335   Challenge: To what extent did the medieval Norse actually penetrate and explore North America?   Justification: Evidence exists that people from Greenland, Iceland, and Scandinavia made deep  explorations into North America in the period from 950 to 1450 AD, far beyond what is generally  acknowledged on the coast of Labrador and Northern Newfoundland. All of the evidence for this has  been generally dismissed in academia, in some cases for clearly legitimate reasons, but in a  significant number of cases the dismissal appears unwarranted and wrong. A serious, thorough,  detailed, fair, and scrupulous effort should be made to definitively evaluate this evidence with the  full panoply of modern forensic archaeology. ¶ Without implying bias towards any expected  outcome for this investigation, but based on public perceptions of their potential relevance, a list of  artifacts to investigate should include: the Kensington Rune Stone, the Spirit Pond Rune Stones, the  Yarmouth/Fletcher "Runic" Stone, the Newport Tower, various small artifacts found in Minnesota,  Wisconsin, and Michigan.  [QCH] Oldest Foundations of Civilization ID: 230   Challenge: You must discover the Oldest Foundation All ancient civilizations are built upon to  understand the true origins of mankind, art and religion.   Justification: I have made a discovery of the Oldest civilization ever discovered with many advanced  forms of artifacts unlike any ever discovered. I have made a connection of metal artifacts from many  different parts of the world that claim extreme age far older than accepted by established  archaeology. Your investigation of ancient history has to be told by the ancient artifacts and not a  preconceived picture. I have not only discovered ancient metal artifacts that are not suppose to  exist but I have discovered a whole civilization. If you would like to investigate, examine, or test  these artifacts I am sure they will speak LOUD and CLEAR to the world the truth of our most ancient  times.  [QCH] Prehistoric Plant & Animal Utilization in MidAtlantic ID: 261   Challenge: There is a need for a better understanding of prehistoric plant and animal utilization  patterns in the Middle Atlantic region.   Justification: There is not a lot of specialized analysis of starch grains, lipids, phytoliths and other  microfossil data in the middle Atlantic region for the prehistoric period. Also the amount and quality  of macrobotanical analysis is not great in NJ, MD, DE. The bone preservation is poor in PA, MD, NJ,  DE, VA so our faunal database is limited for nonshell midden deposits. We need better data on  what people are eating and using in terms of plants and animals which will help use under  settlement pattern data and temporal trends.  [QCH] Relationship of Brazilian and Hopewell Earthworks ID: 244   Challenge: Examine the relationship between recently discovered geometric earthworks in Brazil  and Hopewell earthworks in eastern U.S. As this previously unknown, but obviously extensive, South  American civilization emerges, is it coincidental that there are strong physical similarities, or was  there some cultural link?   Justification: Because of their many similarities in design, construction techniques (earthen  embankments, ditches, parallel lines, etc.), and general time period, one wonders if there is a direct  relationship between the cultures who created the works. So little is known of civilizations in the  western Amazon area, and these recently discovered works seem to indicate quite a large  population in that area around 2000 years ago. Researchers have also suggested that as much as  90% of the total existing earthworks may still be hidden by forests. Along with ongoing traditional  research, it would be interesting to use technology such as LiDAR to examine the forest floor to  discover these hidden works, without having to wait for more deforestation to occur (for better or  for worse). Just how large was the population, and how widespread the culture? What was the  13 

landscape like before the current rain forests? Was there population movement between the  Hopewell heartland and Brazil? Are there other cultural similarities between the two groups? What  might the next chapter hold for the western Amazon basin if it is determined large agrarian  populations once thrived there? Where did the civilization come from  east, down the Amazon?   west, down from the Andes?  north, from the gulf or central America?  8. [QCH] Religious Origins of SE US Mound Builders ID: 232   Challenge: What were the religious origins of the mound builders in the SE USA?   Justification: 

F. [QCNH] Coupled Natural & Human Systems 
1. [QCNH] Dynamics of the European Colonization of the Americas ID: 262   Challenge: Understanding the causes, timing, demographic dynamics, and environmental, social,  political, and economic processes contributing to the collapse and reorganization of human  ecologies coinciding with the European invasion, conquest, and colonization of the Americas, AD  1400present.   Justification: The European invasion of the Americas in the sixteenth century touched off an  unprecedented cycle of socioecological collapse and reorganization. The disastrous introduction of  European pathogens, combined with heavy handed colonial demands for labor and resources  produced demographic declines among native populations estimated at 90% in many areas.  Introduction and differential adoption of European cultigens and domesticated animals altered  existing mutualisms and predator prey relationships. New technologies further altered hunter gatherer and agrarian ecologies, as well as craft specialization, commodities production, distribution  and marketing patterns, and consumption. Macroregional political and economic organization was  reconfigured drastically under colonial regimes, only to be reformulated again in the postcolonial  era with the industrial revolution. ¶ We still do not understand how variation among these  processes produced different trajectories of loss and recovery across the Americas. Nor do we know  how legacies of socioecological collapse and reorganization continue to affect potential,  development, and conservation for descendent native communities in the global era. Archaeological  and paleoenvironmental data are the only sources of information that span both sides of the  sixteenth century European invasion  not historical written records, not ethnographic information   and therefore these should be used in combination to model cause and effect, to articulate how  short term changes articulate to the longue duree at local, regional, and macroregional scales.   2. [QCNH] Dynamics of the European Colonization of the Americas ID: 350   Challenge: Understanding of contact era interaction between Native Americans and Europeans as  the two cultures collided and altered each other in the New World.   Justification: This very broad questions encompasses a plethora of subquestionseverything from  population genetics to the spread of smoking culture.  3. [QCNH] Long term Social & Ecological Dynamics of Major World Regions ID: 354   Challenge: Comparative assessment of long term (millennial) sociopolitical/economic trajectories of  cultural growth within major world regions, with special attention to environmental patterns, the  ecological relationships human communities have developed with them, and the degree to which  culturehistorical connections are and are not significantly associated with the development of  cultural developments across space and time.   Justification:  Important because such studies could give us a comprehensive and longterm  perspective on the large geographical, economic, and sociopolitical patterns that affect us every  day. The world needs a concrete and longterm perspective on the enduring characteristics of  human society that will transcend the blooming, buzzing confusion we are increasingly immersed in  and clarify the trajectory we are on.  4. [QCNH] Long Term Sustainability ID: 355   Challenge: Understanding how human societies have sustained themselves considering the  ecological, economic, social aspects of their interactions with their natural and social environments.  14 

Justification: Archaeology is the one science that can track human interactions with their natural  and social environments over long periods of time. Analysis of archaeological data about these  interactions and whether societies were able to maintain themselves or change in a sustainable  manner will be of interest and importance to contemporary humans.  5. [QCNH] Relationships of Human Population Growth, Technology, and Economy with Benign  Sociopolitical Formations ID: 319   Challenge: What is the relationship between human population growth, technology and economy as  it relates to the formation of sociopolitical systems that encourage cooperation rather than conflict,  equality rather than inequality, and tolerance rather than intolerance?   Justification: Fact 1: Many anthropologists see archaeology as their poor, country cousins: can't  record kin terminologies, mythologies, language, cosmology, and so on; what's the use? All (usually)  true. But archaeology's great strength is its ability to look at a wide variety of human systems (the  world) over long spans of time (the entire range of human evolution) within a common data  framework (material culture). Fact 2: although many factors enter the picture at the scale of a single  case study, it is clear the population growth is a common driving factor in human cultural change.  Fact 3: Human population growth will continue at least through 2075, and move from the current 7  billion to 10 billion. We should know something about how such growth impacts human society; one  way to do so is to use the effects of past population on human society to not only predict but  hopefully "prescribe" the (unique) future so that it comes out the way we would presumably like it  to. Archaeology is the only field positioned to do this. ¶ Conveniently, at the same time that this  important question and challenge confronts us, we have both the data (generated by thousands of  individual research projects) and the synthesizing computational ability (through databases and GIS)  to use the common data of archaeology to examine the effects of population growth under a variety  of different conditions, including environmental, social, and cultural. The challenge comes in  synthesizing the data  thousands of dates (of differing resolutions), and different classifications of  material culture generated by different paradigms of analysis.  6. [QCNH] Sustainability and Waste ID: 366   Challenge: How can archaeologythrough its methods and resultscontribute to our understanding  of the ways in which the chemical and physical remains of past human activities contribute to the  formation of modern landscapes and presentday quality of the earth's soils? This is especially  important considering the crises ahead in agricultural sustainability and in feeding the earth's  populations.   Justification: Past human activities leave tangible remains (industrial waste, processing debris,  human waste, dead bodies, residual waste, rubbish, land fill, abandoned buildings, construction  debris, roads) which break down and contribute to both soil and land formation processes. Yet this  aspect of archaeology has been virtually ignored. The emphasis has been on using remains to  reconstruct past activity. But there is also the question of the transformative properties of what  people, cities, and civilizations have left behind. Given present crises in agricultural sustainability,  resilience of land, and energy inefficiency (too much land devoted to animals and biofuels rather  than crop production for people), it is critical to assess how human activities, past and present,  affect soils and land configuration in quantifiable terms. If principles can be established and  recognized, practices and policies can be developed that would apply to guidelines for industrial  waste, human waste, land fill, or any other process in which remains are generated and deposited  that can be expected to interact with soils and water.  7. [QCNH] Sustainability ID: 223   Challenge: How can archaeology address questions of sustainability, vulnerability and resilience?   Justification: These are important issues, with direct bearing on policy. Failure to understand these  issues can lead humanity into dire situations in the future, with bleak outlooks for nearterm  amelioration. Looking at modern societies to understand these issues is not sufficient, since 1)time  depth is limited which is a problem since some policies/actions appear good in the short term and  15 



8.

9.

10.

11.

prove disastrous in the longer term, and 2) we know the ultimate outcomes and can examine  trajectories in archaeological cases, whereas for modern cases we can only project outcomes, which  are really guesses given the limited understanding of these issues.  [QCNH] Sustainability ID: 226   Challenge: In terms of human social organization and ecology, is there a stage of social development  wherein a population can or will remain at equilibrium with the carrying capacity of its  environment? Can that social stage be maintained or is it in flux? What maintains it? Can knowledge  of past social/ecological successes and failures inform contemporary policy?   Justification: If knowledge of the past cannot inform the direction of contemporary social policy,  archeology is a destructive vanity.  [QCNH] Sustainability ID: 227   Challenge: What can archaeology help us learn about sustainability in the past and about how past  sustainable or unsustainable practices have relevance for present and future societies?   Justification: Huge investments are being made in sustainability, yet much work on the subject lacks  a deeptime perspective. Archaeology provides longterm contexts that can help us understand the  sustainability of various types and scales of certain practices (e.g., land use, water management,  agricultural diversity) in a variety of cultural and environmental contexts.  [QCNH] Sustainability ID: 265   Challenge: Examine the archaeological record of ancient societies around the world for their  successes and failures in sustainability. Components such as environment, ecology, demography,  adaptation, political and social organization, and religion should be included. And I suggest a  minimum of a millennium be used as the time period to judge a society/adaptation as successfully  sustainable.   Justification: For the past two years I have used sustainability as the core theoretical framework in  my undergraduate classes, and in some of my graduate classes. This forces students to examine the  archaeological record of each society in a very different way. They need to know about climate,  environment, soils, and other resources, and how they were utilized. Decision making in egalitarian,  ranked, and stratified societies are very different, and societies that experienced increasing warfare  (e.g. Classic Period Maya) found it to be a shortterm advantage for populations to increase past  that sustainable threshold. We then turn to our society, and begin examining it starting about AD  1900, when our adaptation began to be fundamentally reliant on fossil fuels. We are now slightly  over 10% of the way to the 1000 year marker, and students really "get it" that if we do not make  some fundamental changes in populationresourcesenergy sources, the future is problematic.   [QCNH] Understanding Implications of Cultural Diversity for Sustainability ID: 229   Challenge: The implications of our understanding of past societies and human cultural diversity for  predictions about the longterm future of human civilization   Justification: Over the past 200 years or so archaeologists have in many ways and often in great  detail been adding to a steadily improving understanding of past societies around the globe.  Archaeologists have also learned to appreciate the significance and consequences of human cultural  diversity in time and space. ¶ Although you often read phrases like "learning from the past for the  future" when it comes to justifying archaeological work, it has until today remained largely unclear  precisely what prediction value for the future archaeological knowledge actually has (with the  possible exception of some environmental studies). What is missing is a sophisticated bridge linking  knowledge about the human past with knowledge about the human future, in particular regarding  trends in the evolution of society and likely future patterns of human cultures. ¶ This suggestion  should not be read as a call for a return to the search for lawlike generalizations about human  societies which have been proven to be impossible to gain in any meaningful way. Instead this is a  call for methodological inspiration and systematic cooperation with the interdisciplinary field of  Future Studies (or Futurology). ¶ Gaining such knowledge is not only of strategic value in assisting  fundraising and other PRinitiatives. It is also a matter of profound epistemological significance for a  16 

12.

13.

14.

15.

field like archaeology that endeavors to the study the past in order to contribute to the study of  what it means to be human on planet Earth.  [QCNH] Understanding Individual and Small Group Decisionmaking at Different Scales ID: 379   Challenge: understanding the nature of human interaction in terms of individual and group decision  making at a variety of scales in different cultural and historical contexts within human  history/prehistory   Justification: individual and small group decision making is the basis of all other organizational  structures. Understanding how this operates at a variety of scales and within different cultural and  historical contexts allows us to investigate dynamic human structures.  [QCNH] Understanding Long Term Population Growth ID: 283   Challenge: The need to determine cause and effect variables, timing, and environments in human  population growth. This is an area of research that can only be approached through archaeological  research as archaeology is the only discipline that can study cultures and populations over long time  spans.   Justification: Science must have relevance to today's culture to be considered valuable. ALL  worldwide problems (hunger, wars, etc.) stem from over exploitation of resources, unequal  distribution of resources, and environmental change and degradation. All of these are the result of  human overpopulation. We can either continue to overpopulate, assuring a continuance of the  above listed problems until nature steps in and resets the system... or we can develop a plan for  population control and reduction in hopes of avoiding nature's more radical correction. Knowledge  of past patterns of human population growth and decline will help address this worldwide problem.  [QCNH] Understanding Technological and Economic Transformations ID: 293   Challenge: The timing and nature of broad technological and economic transformations in North  America and their means of transmission/dissemination. This is a broad topic that would address the  timing and nature of broad shifts in hunting technology (i.e. spear to dart and atlatl to bow and  arrow technology) and groundstone technology along with changes in economy from hunting and  gathering to horticulture. At the same time this topic could address the pace and means of  transmission of these changes into different environments and across different cultural groups.   Justification: The topic is broad enough to apply to North America (and could be applied to any large  region). It looks at the broad nature of the means and rate of technological and economic change  and how this occurs and is transmitted or delayed. The results can have diachronic application  beyond the field of archaeology itself.  [QCNH] What Drove Population Expansion Across Continents ID: 251   Challenge: What drove people to expand across the continents? Or, were ancient huntergatherers  living below the environment's carrying capacity?   Justification: As best as we can tell from archaeology and genetics, huntergatherer population  levels were quite low at least until two or three thousand years ago. So why did they rapidly expand  across every continent? People tend to assume, explicitly or as part of evolutionary explanations,  that they were forced to emigrant by population pressure. But population levels, even in the areas  left behind, seem to be well below carrying capacity. If that's true, we have to reject most ideas  about why the continents filled up. If it's not true, then we really don't know anything about past  population levels. 

G. [QOT] Other Theme 
1. [QOT] Social Change ID: 202   Challenge: 1) the social change in the past   Justification:  2. [QOT] Understanding Relationships Among Languages ID: 286   Challenge: Discovering and understanding the relationships between languages.   Justification: The world has thousands of languages. For many, historical connections have been  demonstrated, but there is a large number that are called language isolates, with no known  17 

3.

4.

5.

6.

historical connection to any other language. If only there were some meaningful way to compare  languages to discover historical relationships beyond what seems possible now. There must be  cognates that go unrecognized.  [QOT] Understanding scale at which the unpredictable behavior of individuals transforms into the  more predictable behavior of groups ID: 302   Challenge: Identifying the scale at which the unpredictable behavior of individuals transforms into  the slightly more predictable behavior of groups, as seen in the archaeological record.   Justification: Although the nature of archaeological data means that we examine the debris of  "groups", the material culture record is nonetheless an agglomeration of the behaviors of  individuals. There is no standard agreement within the discipline on where the line is between  aggregated individual remains and broader social groupings; indeed, many contend that it is only  possible to investigate individual pasts, or that behaviors are so contingent that analogy and  parallels are nearly meaningless. However, world historians and animal behavioralists study their  subjects at scales which do not recognize individuals, only groups. It is therefore possible to draw  back from individuals to groups, but at what point in the data collection of standard archaeological  practice can this be recognized, as an "industry standard"?  [QOT] Understanding Settlement Pattern Change ID: 254   Challenge: One general challenge is understanding how and why settlement pattern change occurs,  when areas are abandoned or when nucleation or dispersion of settlements occur. These kinds of  understanding are related to but not always driven by subsistence, so the two should be decoupled  when trying to address this kind of question. Specifically, in many parts of the Eastern Woodlands,  Woodland period settlement changed from dispersed to nucleated and, in some areas, Mississippian  period settlement shifted to dispersed again, then back to nucleated.   Justification: Explaining such changes and shifts requires largescale archaeological survey data that  has been acquired systematically and in a manner that assures that dispersed settlements will be  identified. This has not always been the case with existing survey data. For example, Stephen  Williams' Vacant Quarter hypothesis for late Mississippian abandonment of large areas of the  Central and Lower Mississippi Valley only has credibility if one believes that survey was done  appropriately to find and record small dispersed occupations. T. R. Kidder's idea that the LMV was  abandoned because of increased episodes of largescale flooding at the end of the Late Archaic  Poverty Point period also might be thrown into doubt by similar uncertainties.  [QOT] Understanding the Adoption of New Nationalities by Immigrants ID: 308   Challenge: Adoption of 'new' nationalities by emigrants/immigrants throughout the 19th and 20th  centuries   Justification: This is a grand challenge because it requires work in two spheres; 'historical'  archaeology in Europe (the 'Old World') in a way that it has rarely been carried out  in order to  create meaningful comparisons in the 'New World'  the US, Canada, Australia etc.  [QOT] Understanding the Role of Psychotropics ID: 358   Challenge: To identify and interpret evidence for mindaltering/psychoactive substances in the  archaeological record, ranging from the micro (chemical and physical trace residues on artifacts) to  the macroscale (carbonized plant remains and rock art imagery).   Justification: The occurrence of altered states of consciousness among proto and prehistoric  peoples have been neglected in archaeological studies. Ethnohistorical data shows that altered  states, such a trance experience and dreaming, has been common and cherished among Native  American Indian groups, for example. The role that psychotropics have played in human physiology,  cultural notions, social organization, religious experiences, and interpersonal relationships, the  identification of alkaloids and residues found on artifacts, and the impact that these substances  have had on society in general. Archaeological, chemical, paleoenvironmental, ethnohistorical,  ethnographic, and rock art research provides a framework for understanding why humans appear to  have had a physiological need for mindaltering experiences and the technologies and objects they  18 

developed for harvesting, producing, and consuming a compendium of various substances.  Numerous advances in residue analysis (e.g., gas chromatography) and chronometric techniques  over the last 20 years now provide a much stronger framework for examining the role that  psychoactive substances played in proto and prehistoric societies.  7. [QOT] When did humans occupy the high mountain regions of the world? ID: 326   Challenge: When did humans occupy the high mountain regions of the world? What cultural and  biological adaptations were required?   Justification: The Himalayas, Alps, western cordillera of North America and the Andes provided  enormous challenges to the adaptability of humans as they spread across the world. We need to  know the timing of these occupations as well as the mechanisms for doing so. The ability to live at  high altitude is one that requires fundamentally different biological activities and energetics.  Broadening our knowledge of this movement will provide useful information about the biological  and cultural shifts needed that will enhance our understanding of humanity and its evolution.  8. [QOT] Demography of Early Populations ID: 389    Challenge: The demography of early populations   Justification: Archaeological research and interpretation are based on a series of implicit  assumptions regarding population levels (as well as other demographic issues). These are seldom  made explicit and often demonstrate variety between practitioners, but are fundamental to how we  understand the past. Placing population levels and other demographic questions for any period  (particularly for prehistory) on a scientific footing is essential in moving to robust understandings of  past societies. 

H. [QPA] Peopling of Americas 
1. [QPA] Explore Submerged Sites ID: 250   Challenge: The early habitation sites of the first migrants to the Americas are likely submerged due  to rising sea levels since the LGM. An underwater search for these sites should be conducted.   Justification: Discovery of Pleistocene submerged habitation sites would confirm that the first  people were maritime adapted and would give us an understanding of what they ate and what tools  they used. We could understand their lifeways through a study of their tools and answer questions  about how they secured their food, how they travelled and how they camped. We may learn about  their social structure from any prestige goods found. The discovery of the remains of a watercraft  would be particularly interesting as no ancient watercraft has survived from those times.  2. [QPA] Explore Submerged Sites ID: 371   Challenge: The study of nowsubmerged prehistoric coastal settlements. Inundated terrestrial sites.   Justification: Submerged prehistoric sites have the potential to illuminate the settlement of the New  World, as well as increase our understanding of settlement patterns, resource use, and material  culture (preserved organic materials).  3. [QPA] First People of NE North America ID: 237   Challenge: Who were the first people in Northeast North America and how did they get here?   Justification: There are several manifestations of Paleoindian culture in Maine, Quebec and the  Maritime Provinces. What is there temporal relationships (as they are poorly dated)? Who were the  pioneers? What resources did they follow?  4. [QPA] Role of Women and Lifeways in PaleoIndian Period ID: 239   Challenge: What were people's lives like during the Paleoindian period in North America, especially  the women's involvement in the information systems operating across Paleoindian society(ies)?   Justification: Much of our information about Paleoindian society(ies) is still based on a fastmoving  male hunter biggamefocused model of who the people were and what they did in those societies.  We have not given significant attention to the women in those societies, in their roles as food acquirers, toolmakers, nurturers, birth mothers, communicators of  cultural/technological/subsistence information, etc. We probably can't find a lot of evidence that  specifically says "girl" on it, but we can use a multidisciplinary approach (history, psychology,  19 

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

sociology, anthropology, biology, etc.) to interpret the nowalmostmissing 50% of human  communities during the Paleoindian period. The role of information sharing and generation across  Paleoindian societies is critical, and even recent discussions of this do not pay much attention to the  female half of any culture. These are the people who were adapting to a new hemisphere in  markedly changing climates from the Arctic to the tropics, and we need to understand the  sophistication with which they must have used (and modified?) the resources that they  encountered. Understanding the extinction of some game animals during this period is a part of this  puzzleall of which need a strong understanding of the female portion of these societies.  [QPA] Timing and Origins of Peopling of the Americas ID: 267   Challenge: Timing and origins of the peopling of the Americas. Are there multiple migrations from  different areas? Which of these migrations represents the ancestors of historic native American  populations.   Justification:  [QPA] Understanding Peopling of the Americas ID: 309   Challenge: The great challenge is to connect North American archaeology with that of East Asia in  order to assess just what came with the peoples who traversed the Bering land bridge. When? Who?  How many times? More links are waiting to be discovered but they require much greater  communication and command of nonEuropean languages in the American archaeological  community.   Justification: Both the peopling of the Americas and the early cultural development will become  accessible by broadening the comparative perspective. Cultural evolutionary theory depends on the  American analogy for support. PreColumbian European contacts are evidently not supported and  Asian origins seem confirmed but no one looks beyond vague similarities to see what they mean in  cultural terms.  [QPA] Understanding Peopling of the Americas ID: 325   Challenge: The human settlement of the Americas is an issue which requires a broad multi disciplinary approach, and an unbiased, open mind. In the past, rather dogmatic ideas about how  this occurred, stifled a lot of research. New technologies are also now available to help with this  question.   Justification: Why is the question of " what were the first Americans like and where did they come  from" important? For one thing it provides important information on how and when humans spread  throughout the world. It should tell us about the means by which crossings over large areas of what  is presently oceans took place. Early technologies may have been far more sophisticated than we  currently acknowledge.  [QPA] Understanding Peopling of the Americas ID: 346   Challenge: Timing, routes, and sequence of the peopling of the New World. If "Clovis First," we must  account for differential expression of immediate postClovis (Folsom, Great Basin Stemmed  Tradition, etc.). And we must explain the presence of Clovis contemporaries on the Santa Barbara  Channel Islands.   Justification: It is apparent that Clovis is differentially expressed in differing parts of the New World.  In California, for example, "Clovislike" points are a better description of the signature artifact;  contemporaneous sites, on Channel Islands, for example, are entirely without Clovis Points. It begs  the question, "How many sites are Cloviscontemporary but unidentified as such simply in view of a  missing point type," not just for California (or South America), but for the Clovis strongholds in the  remainder of North America as well.  [QPA] Understanding Peopling of the Americas ID: 368   Challenge: Peopling of the New World, as always, is an area that requires extensive research.   Justification: 

20 

I. [QPAQ] Paleoanthropology Questions 
1. [QPAQ] Art & the Origins of Human Behavioral Modernity ID: 281   Challenge: The origin(s) of human behavioral modernity is a fundamental archaeological problem.  The ability to create complex art is a diagnostic attribute of this archaeological modernity. Rock art  worldwide provides the most accessible and obvious evidence of this behavioral trait. New and  improved techniques for rock art dating are required to exploit this key line of evidence.   Justification: African evidence has demonstrated that human anatomical modernity preceded  behavioral/cognitive modernity by 100,000 or more years. The timing, cause and variables involved  in the transition to cognitive modernitywhat has made us "human"are fundamental archaeological  problems. Initial research focused on Europe, where complex cave paintings in preserved contexts  demonstrate sophisticated symbolism and artistry by ~40k YBP. Research has shifted to Africa, with  various archaeological evidence, of different ages, argued to demonstrate modernity, perhaps by  ~70k YBP. But missing from the African evidence is the kind of complex art and symbolism that are a  key component of the European evidencerock art. Despite the importance of early engraved  African ochre tablets, e.g., it is difficult to compare their cognitive, behavioral and social significance  to the elaborate paintings at Chauvet, France. Yet surely elaborate and complex art, and the  religious beliefs and practices that this usually expresses, are required for behavioral/cognitive  modernity. The difficulty is that potential early African rock art primarily consists of openair  petroglyphs. A series of petroglyph dating techniques were developed in the 1980s. Their  development and utility foundered during the 1990s, due to an unfortunate controversy involving  only one of the techniques. This controversy has been resolved, but it derailed archaeological use of  the other dating approaches. Meanwhile LamontDoherty has made significant advances in one of  these, varnish microlamination dating, though used almost exclusively for geomorphological  research. In order to adequately address the origins of modernity problem, a program of openair  rock art dating needs to be established. This should involve basic research to develop new  techniques and improve existing ones, as well as substantial empirical work on African, southern  Asian, and Australian petroglyphs.  2. [QPAQ] Subsistence, technology, and cultural innovations of the earliest anatomically modern  humans ID: 240   Challenge: A grand challenge problem in archaeology is to gather multidisciplinary information  concerning the subsistence, technology, and cultural innovations of the earliest anatomically  modern humans in eastern Africa, especially Ethiopia and Kenya.   Justification: Fossil evidence collected and described by research projects working in Ethiopia have  shown that the earliest anatomically modern humans are known from sites in Ethiopia, including  Herto and Omo Kibish. The archaeological record associated with this momentous biological  transformation is poorly understood, however, so we cannot know to what degree behavioral  modernity accompanied anatomical modernity. Largescale, multidisciplinary and longterm  research in eastern African deposits dating to ca. 200,000 ybp would be indispensably valuable for  our understanding of modern human origins. Sites, some of them as yet uninvestigated or even  discovered, yielding hominid fossils, fauna, and tools (stone as well as bone) would be uniquely  informative about the emergence and subsequent dispersal of modern humans.  3. [QPAQ] Understanding Demographic Dynamics of Expansion of Modern Humans ID: 266   Challenge: Understanding the origin, timing, routes, and demographic dynamics of the expansions  of modern humans from eastern and northeastern Africa to Europe and Asia during the last  interglacial and last Ice Age.   Justification: Anatomically modern humans apparently expanded out of Africa in two distinct  periods: first during the last interglacial (12875,000 years ago), and again during the middle of the  last glacial (6050,000 years ago). ¶ Out of Africa 1: The interglacial expansion over 100,000 years  ago may involve two routes: (1) north from Egypt via the Sinai Peninsula and (2) south/east across  islands at the south end of the Red Sea. Evidence for the northern route is mainly found in two  21 

famous burial sites in Israel (Skhul and Qafzeh). The associated artifacts are not correlated with  specific African artifact industries. Genetic admixture between modern humans and Neanderthals  may have occurred at this time. However, alternative hypotheses proposed by the geneticists have  not been tested. Evidence for the southern route is found in several archaeological sites in Oman  that have a distinctive and unique Nilotic/Ethiopian Nubian Mousterian stone tool Industry. No  human fossils are associated with the Omani artifacts. Whether these early African populations  disappeared during the subsequent early glacial era, or persisted and interacted with, or were  replaced by Neanderthals are fundamental outstanding questions. Diagnostic African technologies  are claimed to exist in India, but this evidence is contested. ¶ Out of Africa 2: Genetic evidence  shows that the ancestors of all living human populations outside of Africa are descendants of east  Africans that expanded out of Africa during the middle of the last ice age. Whether the only the  southern or both northern and southern routes were used is contested. Genetic molecular clock  dating suggests expansion ~60,000 years ago via the south route to Australia by 50,000 years ago,  and expansion ~50,000 years ago to northern and western Eurasia, reaching Europe 43,000 years  ago. Diagnostic evidence of antecedent Eastern African archaeological cultures is entirely lacking for  both expansion routes, as are diagnostic human fossils. ¶ The foundations of modern human  behavior outside of Africa were laid in Eastern Africa, but the lion's share of research and funding  has gone to southern Africa. Archaeological and paleoanthropological evidence for these expansions  in eastern and northeastern Africa and the Arabian Peninsula is sparse to nonexistent. Welldated  archaeological and fossil evidence from East Africa, the Nile valley, and along the routes out of Africa  is needed to evaluate the timing, routes and demographic dynamics of these two expansions out of  Africa during the last Interglacial and glacial eras. In order to amass the amount of evidence needed  evidence a Manhattan Project scale of archaeological field research is needed in eastern Africa. ¶  4. [QPAQ] Understanding Demographic Dynamics of Expansion of Modern Humans ID: 298   Challenge: The good/bad/neutral paleecological effects of globally dispersing modern Homo sapiens  during the Pleistocene   Justification: In many landmasses, the earliest appearances of modern H. sapiens occurred around  the same time as the largest terrestrial mammals in those continents and islands became extinct.  The two processes  human dispersal and largemammal extinction  seem too synchronous to be  coincidental. Were the processes both endresults of other events such as climatechange? Were  they linked as cause and effect? Were they independent of climate change? Did human hunting or  habitatalteration lead to the extinctions? 

J. [QSC] Social Complexity 
1. [QSC] Dynamics of Complex Societies, technological Development, and Economic Growth ID: 365   Challenge: 1.Understanding how and why complex societies grow, what makes them tick, and what  leads to their decline. The variability of complex societies is the secret to answering the questions,  and hence comparative work is critical. ¶ 2.Economic and technological "development", or  economic "growth" in the past affected the lives of whole populations.    Justification: Complex societies have largely "won out" in the human past, they have farreaching  effects but are not very stable, and appear in a myriad of organizational variants. They provided the  contexts for increased economic and technological complexity but not at a very imposing rate. They  transformed settlement systems and led to a wide variety of urban centers that become a new  context of social life. It is in a comparative frame when we examine trajectories of change that we  have a chance to see underlying processes and determine what checks or promotes the processes.  Of particular interest is the (debated) extent to which they promoted economic change that might  be referred to as "growth" or "development" that made an aggregate impact on the daily lives of  most of the population. The extent to which they were exploitative, constructive, or differential in  their effects on life chances is important to understand because they have created the conditions of  modern life. ¶  2. [QSC] Emergence of Leaders with Coercive Force ID: 342  22 

Challenge: The transition from leaders whose authority was based on kinship ties, bonds of  reciprocity, or links to supernatural powers to leaders who governed by force transformed the  nature of human societies. How did such leaders gain and, perhaps more importantly, legitimate  their ability to use coercive force?   Justification:  3. [QSC] Emergence of Social Hierarchies ID: 218   Challenge: Understanding of the different contexts of the emergence of centralized social  hierarchies, including the state, across the world.   Justification: This is an important question because it relates not only to events that happened in  the past, and are therefore potentially studied by Archaeology, but also because it address  contemporary political questions related to the weak presence or absolute absence of the state in  many contexts around the word, as it is the case of the socalled "failed states". The study of this  question should also highlight the many contexts were the state never developed in the past, and  which were the mechanisms through which local populations prevented that from happening.  4. [QSC] How Peripheral Populations are Incorporated in Formative States ID: 357   Challenge: Understanding the processes by which people outside the population centers are  incorporated into a formative state   Justification: In order to understand state formation processes, the archaeologist needs to  understand the ways in which people outside the population centers are incorporated into the state  through political, military, economic, social, and ceremonial processes. Archaeological excavation  has traditionally focused on the large sites which were the population centers. Many of the small  sites outside the population centers are not fully documented or the documentation is scattered in  hardtoaccess reports.  5. [QSC] Origin of the Early States ID: 273   Challenge: I'd suggest a renewed focus on some of the bigpicture questions that used to drive the  discipline/ How did the first states emerge?   Justification:  6. [QSC] Origin of the Early States ID: 344   Challenge: The development of "state" level societies.   Justification: Addresses questions of how our species transitioned from small extended family or  corporate groups based on simple economies to the point that human impacts on the environment  challenge out planet's survival.  7. [QSC] Origins of government ID: 206   Challenge: Origins of government   Justification: Governments arose in prehistoric times, and continue today. Much Political Science  proceeds forward from the Greeks; there's much, much more to the story.  8. [QSC] Relevance of Ancient Urbanism ID: 351   Challenge: Urbanism.   Justification: Urbanism began in prehistory. Cities are still with us, and encompass more and more  of our populations. Much Urban Planning proceeds forward from Antiquity, or perhaps  Mesopotamia, but urbanism was older and broader.  9. [QSC] Origin of Cities, Governments, and Civil Society ID: 391   Challenge: What is the origin of cities, governments, and civil society?   Justification: From the political philosophers of the eighteenth century to archaeologists today,  many writers agree that the transition from egalitarian societies to states was the most momentous  social transformation in the history of our species. Known in archaeology since the 1930s as the  "Urban Revolution," this momentous change saw the origins of governments, the growth of  institutionalized inequality, and the creation of new and complex social patterns. Through history  these innovations have spread and expanded, creating both positive and negative consequences for  people. Today their legacy dominates life on earth. As one of the few scholarly disciplines with  23 



abundant empirical data on this change, archaeologists have a responsibility to document and  explain the Urban Revolution. Yet in the past two decades, scholars in other disciplines--notably  economics and political science--have usurped archaeology as the major source of theories and  models for the rise of state societies and complex economies, producing accounts that are blatantly  inaccurate and ethnocentric. It is time for archaeology as a discipline to retake this territory. We  need to reassert our scientific credibility and demonstrate that we have and will continue to  generate the best data and models to understand the single most dramatic transformation in the  history of our species.  10. [QSC] Origin if Cities; Rise and Fall of Cities ID: 392   Challenge: Why do cities form?   Justification: Cities are neither ubiquitous nor inevitable among human societies. Researchers  across academia are trying to learn why cities develop among some societies but not others, and  why processes such as settlement aggregation or occupational specialization are sometimes but not  always associated with urbanization and cities. Archaeology has a unique contribution to make to  these broad socialscientific questions. This question has two domains. The first is the origins of the  first cities. Archaeology has unique and important data bearing on the origins of cities in a number  of world areas. The second domain is the rise and fall specific cities and urban systems after the  Urban Revolution. Although this domain is currently dominated by the fields of economic history,  geography, and urban history, archaeology also has an important part to play in documenting the  rise and fall of cities in numerous urban traditions not traditionally considered by other disciplines.  There is a broad consensus in urban scholarship that answers to basic questions of urban growth  and decline--why cities are founded, why they grow and flourish, and why the decline--can help us  explain urban and social dynamics today.  11. [QSC] Using Urban Landscapes to Understand Social Organization ID: 390   Challenge: How can the historical and archaeological urban landscape and building remains aid our  understanding of social interactions, examining what insights they give into the organization and  operation of past societies and how urbanism shaped those societies.   Justification: Urbanism is a major element of many societies, and often has a profound impact on  both the organization of those societies and their subsequent development. Conscious choices in  urban planning and the layout of both towns and individual buildings and structures can have a large  impact on the way social interactions will be conducted and indeed whether certain interactions are  possible at all. For instance, examination of wheel ruts in the Roman city of Pompeii indicate that an  organized system for directing traffic was in operation, which provides insights into both social  organization and governance. ¶ Another contrasting example could be the urban centers of the  Indus Valley (Harappan) Civilization. These cities clearly are planned and organized, but unlike other  examples of past urbanism such as Roman cities like Pompeii which show quite a degree of social  stratification, buildings and dwellings in these cities generally have a fairly uniform size and layout,  with the exception of certain larger structures such as the Great Baths of MohenjoDaro, with little  evidence of large differences between structures and subsequently of social stratification. This again  can provide evidence of social organization and how urbanism both shaped societies and was  shaped by them.   

24 

II. Methodological Needs 
A. [MDA] Dating 
1. [MDA] Refine Dating Frameworks ID: 213   Challenge: Precise dating frameworks on which to base the resulting thematic, artifactual,  theoretical or practical solution. For example the recent Bayesian statistical assessment undertaken  in Britain on C14 dating from early Neolithic Causewayed Enclosures that has enabled a rigid  chronological basis to be applied on what was previously only poorly understood and has allowed  local and regional differences to be recognized in the spread of this Neolithic phenomena.   Justification: Chronological accuracy is a crucial issue whereby in areas lacking scientific dating  methodologies, either dendrochronological, carbon 14, OSL or similar, and are reliant on typological  or diagnostic criteria, or even poorly assessed C14 dates where they may not have been subject to  rigorous assessment in either their quality or provenance of the sample, resulting theories regarding  the societies are based on a generalized chronology.  2. [MDA] Refine Dating Frameworks ID: 295   Challenge: Refining existing dating techniques and developing new ones to assist study of artifact poor regions and periods and in particular periods of change. In the UK that would include Roman to  postRoman.   Justification: Taking the end of the Roman period in Britain as an example we see a loss of  chronologically diagnostic material and in some areas an apparent absence of material culture that  survives on conventional dry land sites. In addition some areas of Britain and/or site types during  the Roman period have very little material culture, for example rural sites in northwestern England  despite the identification of increasing numbers, or sites of probable Romanperiod and presumably  also postRoman date. Extensive c14 dating, coupled with Bayesian statistics and archaeomagnetic  dating etc. can go so far in addressing the issues but often the expense and sample requirements  are inhibiting factors. A consequence of the problem is that it is often impossible to do more than  conclude that a site is Iron Age/Roman and postRoman sites are rarely identified leading to a poorly  nuanced understanding of key periods of change. My assumption is that it is possible to transfer  these issues to other countries and periods where chronologically diagnostic material is sparse or  poorly understood.  3. [MDA] Refine Dating Frameworks ID: 322   Challenge: Chronometric capabilities: refine the ones we have (e.g., greater precision for  radiocarbon), further develop newer ones, and combine methods for greater rigor.   Justification: Most of the sites in my area are undateable with current methods. Placing a  site/features/artifacts into a time frame is usually the first order of inquiry upon which other  research questions depend.  4. [MDA] Chronometric Ceramic Dating ID: 367   Challenge: A challenge for archaeology is chronometric dating. We are currently limited to either  historical means of dating or radiometric means. It would be useful to have developed a widely  available dating method developed for ceramics, a nearubiquitous facet of much of the world's  archaeological record. So, a method relating to the rearrangement, possibly, of microstructures in  ceramics when they are fired. I think something along these lines is already being developed in the  U.K.; improving that nascent research would be quite helpful and tie in with potterysourcing   bringing together the where and when of archaeology, the field's two most central aspects.   Justification: 

B. [MDACS] Data Access, Comparison & Synthesis 
1. [MDACS] [PIR]  Access to Archaeological Information   Challenge: Further comment   Crucial issues for understanding past societies require a longer, more  stable cycle for research productivity than we have now. Academia rewards shortterm gains and  partial publishing/republishing to the detriment of longterm vision, work on key problems, and  related infrastructure. Collaboration and teamwork (accepted as essential in fieldwork, usually  25 

2.

3.

4.

5.

through marshaling students) is extremely challenging for analysis that crosses departments or  campuses. A related challenge is making basic data readily accessible for comparative research (not  rewarded sufficiently in the publishorlanguish/perish environment). Collaboration often needs skill  sets for analysis of new spatial and environmental data (we now have imagery sources that have  detail and scope not readily available before); these skills are not widely distributed in our field. The  competitive academic environment is good for archaeology, but it needs some checks and balances  to protect the necessity and potential of longerterm and collaborative efforts.    Justification:  [MDACS] Ability to Do Comparative Research ID: 306   Challenge: With respect to archeology, anthropology, astronomy, similarities of cultures, years of  existence, language both written and spoken, and calendar sites all need to be collected by place  and dates in a form that would allow comparisons and perhaps see connections that are currently  not known or noticed between all the developments of civilization.   Justification: There is a strong tendency in science to hone in on a subject and delve into that  subject or microsubject to where we "can't see the forest for the trees". After reader for years  about every imaginable related areas I have had the thought many times that I saw a reference or  similar information somewhere else but about a different place, culture or time. There is a need for  a way to see and refer back to all the developments of mankind for comparison.  [MDACS] Access to Archaeologcial Information ID: 304   Challenge: Managing the archaeological information from the excavation to the scientist or the  reader of the 22snd century   Justification: Managing the information in archaeology does not only mean computational  archaeology. Improving the access and the use of data for contemporary scientist is a thing.  Preserve the right information coming from the field in 2012 to the scientist in 2123 is another  problem to solve. If archives from the fields are not rightly preserved, in a trusted form, the  archaeologist of the 22nd century will not be able to reconsider the results of previous excavations  in his field on the light of the primary data (=archives + objects). ¶ Managing the information in  archaeology means hardware, software and enough money, yes, but most of all, it means knowhow  and education.  [MDACS] Access to Archaeological Information ID: 299   Challenge: Sufficient funds & technology  beyond digital, film, & cloud formats  that will allow  future researchers to READ all the data & report records collected at state and federal levels once  these media formats are obsolete.   Justification: Gov't agencies have been storing archaeological data in nonpaper media formats  since the floppy disc in the 1970s. Many of these data & reports are now inaccessible because we no  longer have the technology to read them or translate them into more current media formats.  What's the use of collecting & storing these data if future researchers cannot easily read them?  Better to return to paper formats or develop a "universal translation software" that will apply to ALL  the media used since 1966..  [MDACS] Access to Archaeological Information ID: 316   Challenge: In regions where there is great variability in site size and deposit type, we lack programs  that allow us to access and use data from several prior excavations in a useful and synthetic manner  across geographic space and over periods of time.   Justification: Archaeologists often investigate each site as if it was unique, without really knowing if  that is really the case (at least until one is senior enough to have experience working at dozens of  archaeological deposits). As a result, much time is taken up excavating small sites, sites that could be  examined and defined through minimal probing and a review of digitized grids of already  investigated sites. These smaller sites have greatest importance in patterning cultural land use and  should be approached through geo/temporal assigned to a grid of site types. Such sites could be  revisited to confirm various hypotheses constructed to examine geo/temporal cultural patterns. ¶  26 

Conversely, it would help advance the profession if major sites were investigated in greater detail  and over sufficient time to allow for changes in investigative methods and strategies. The notion  that a 5% of even 10% sample of a large site is sufficient to define a major site is nonsense. ¶  Whatever program is used to accomplish this geographic and temporal site data assembly needs to  be adaptable to new input and have the capacity to shift data sets into new categories as they arise.  The program also should be adaptable for input of ethnographic and historic document data and  oral history records.  6. [MDACS] Access to Archaeological Information ID: 377   Challenge: (1) The different, unmergeable databases across states and regions in the US. For  instance, AZ alone has at least five primary site and project databases (AZSITE, ADOT Portal, INFRA,  ASMIS, IMACS) and associated archives used by different land managers/agencies for data  entry/upload, storage, research, and form generation. No central repository and data stored and  retrieved differently in each instance.   Justification: (1) Have to physically go to respective agencies or have special remote access  permission (which comes at a cost) for accessing much of their stored data in these different  databases. Only two of the five listed above is accessible online (both with paid and applied  permission applicable), and only partial information can be retrieved in this manner. Only one of the  two allows the user to retrieve actual reports. AZSITE=Arizona State Museum (old site forms, project  cover sheets, site and project locations); ADOT Portal=Arizona Department of Transportation  (project reports and associated correspondence organized by highway); INFRA (Region 3 US Forest  Service, have to apply for and obtain permission and access at a Forest location; can access site and  project info including GIS database information, though not specifically linked);ASMIS (National Park  Service site and collections database); IMACS=regionally based and no central database; depends on  how different agencies use it and whether they have you do data entry, typically into an Access  database.  7. [MDACS] Access to Gray Literature ID: 291   Challenge: The ability to compare assemblages and features from historic sites especially those  available only in the "gray literature."   Justification: Science proceeds in a step by step fashion that includes the use of comparative data to  broaden the scope or depth of research topics. Within the US almost all historical archaeology is  funded by agencies or institutions with very narrow, specific objectives. There are few readily  available, comprehensive and detailed data basesan exception are those published by Sonoma  State University in California and a few others. But when one looks for minimum vessel lists, macro botanical or faunal information in other regions, it becomes clear that very little is available online  and that, because of cost, final printed reports for sites excavated under the aegis of CRM studies  are stored in very few places, generally local repositories near the location of a given site. When  professional archaeologists give papers and publish in journals, they pick and chose the aspects of  their site that they wish to highlight. Their topics are highly variable, dependent on assorted  theoretical paradigms, and the personal interests of the people involved. Often, the information  another researcher needs is 'locked away' in a final report that is not readily available; equally often  it is not presented in a standardized form that allows one to look at different data sets and make  comparisons. It is all rather higgledypiggledy despite efforts to impart order. This closes off the type  of research that will ultimately allow the discipline to advance, to know where gaps exist, and how  to fill them.  8. [MDACS] Access to Gray Literature ID: 305   Challenge: Given the massive amounts of contract work, contract reports need to be digitized and  made universally available to the entire profession. In digital form, they can be widely circulated and  are keyword searchable. Without that, they serve a miniscule and largely local subset of  archaeologists and have at best a tiny impact on the advancement of the science. Given the millions  of dollars spent annually on contractrelated archaeology, the expenditure is not justified by the  27 

resulting contribution to archaeology.   Justification:  9. [MDACS] Access to Gray Literature ID: 333   Challenge: Assemble, organize and synthesize the gray literature for North American archeology for  the past 50 years. An enormous amount of information languishes in unpublished form, creating  redundancy of effort.   Justification:  10. [MDACS] Access to Gray Literature ID: 352   Challenge: Getting all the CRM gray literature in the country scanned, digitized, and indexed; and  setting up a controlled access system that allows qualified archeologists online access to this  database.   Justification: Information contained in previous CRM reports is effectively lost if it cannot be readily  accessed by researchers. The next generation of contract archeologists is losing touch with the  results of earlier work. Synthesis is desperately needed in many regions but can only be done if the  data are accessible.  11. [MDACS] Access to Information on Artifact Collections ID: 384   Challenge: Inventorying, documenting and making accessible to search the alreadyexisting cultural  collections held in the nation's museums and repositories.   Justification: In other disciplines major infrastructural initiatives often support ambitious facilities  generating new informationthe large hadron collider, for example. In many of the social sciences  an equally ambitious and interdisciplinary project would be documenting and making available the  information already present in existing facilities, including both museums, repositories and  university departments/archives. ¶ The fundamental question is what data are already available but  unknown in the nation's museums and repositories? At this point it's known that the scale is  enormous, but little other substantive data are at hand. Current research competitions in the field based social sciences support projects which generate new data (in some cases, such as  archaeology, by impacting remaining in situ cultural resources) without clear knowledge of whether  the data to address these questions may already have been collected. These collections may be  housed in different kinds of institutions and categorized under a range of rubrics (art collections,  ethnographic collections, historical collections, anthropological collections, archaeological  collections, or natural history collections, among others), making the relative significance or even  existence of important datasets relatively unknown to scholars. Surely knowing what kinds of data  are already available should be a necessarily precursor to determining what kinds must be collected  next? ¶ A survey of extant collections to determine the scope and character of existing collections,  and to make these resources more readily available to researchers of all kinds, would be a truly  grand challenge, transforming our understanding of both cultural institutions and how their  collections could be used to document and interrogate processes of social and environmental  change. It would represent the single largest, most ambitious and most transformational  infrastructural improvement possible in the fieldbased social sciencesand especially archaeology,  which accepts preservation of the in situ record as an ethical precept. NSF has previously  demonstrated a commitment to the development of metadata standards and crossinstitutional  data access in the biological sciences; such an initiative involving cultural collections is in many ways  more crucial because of the greater diversity of descriptors and nomenclatures currently used in  collections documentation, but in some senses may prove more tractable because of advances in  both flexibility of database architecture and the prior existence of cultural metadata standards  (CIDOC, Dublin Core, etc.,) in several forms. The challenges previously faced by many museums in  complying with provisions of the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA),  particularly those requiring full survey, identification and reporting of objects actually or potentially  covered by the Act, may also prove instructive in this regard, and much of the institutional memory  regarding how the provisions of the Act were originally met is now being lost. An ambitious, long 28 

12.

13.

14.

15.

term project of this kind is thus timely both in terms of the research questions being asked and the  human resources necessary for its completion.  [MDACS] Access to Literature ID: 204   Challenge: One of the key challenges in the move to digital archaeology is ensuring the access of all  parties to digital resources. Enhancing access to both synthetic writings and data reports will help  promote good research, and perhaps help prevent redundancy in sampling and data collection  efforts, by ensuring that archaeologists simply "know what is out there."   Justification: 1. All archaeology conducted in the US should be informed by research and be  conducted with the intention of increasing knowledge and scholarship. ¶ 2. There are some strong  barriers created by our job settings, that undermine our ability to do top quality research  archaeology. Archaeologists working in private sector settings and in some government positions do  not have easy access to digital publications, such as JSTOR and other aggregator packages or articles.  We can become visiting scholars, and in the future we may be able to increase our access by  becoming AAA members and partaking of their new initiative. However, these are individual  solutions, done at individual expense, and don't solve the larger problem. ¶ One the other side of  the equation, archaeologists working in academic settings, particularly when they work in  departments away from their research areas, do not know what work has been done by CRM that  could inform their research. They are unaware of new excavated sites, new collections, etc., As such  the technical reports written by CRM authors are not being used to their maximum potential. ¶ The  lack of knowledge about what has gone before in both scenarios makes for more redundancy of  work and effort. ¶ 3. Encouraging archaeology to be conducted with the research questions always  in mind, is good for public benefit, as our questions about human history, behaviors, and actions are  a good place to engage the curiosity of other stakeholders and other interested parties. Archaeology  that is focused upon only meeting the development challenges, no matter how well done, and that  simply creates inventories of artifacts and features without creating a story isn't moving us forward  as needed. So, I think that creating bridges between digitally available data, technical reports, and  published articles helps to create meaningful research designs and field strategies that will allow the  day to day work of applied archaeologists to be integrated with the work of the scholars  in any job  setting  who write those bigger stories.  [MDACS] Access to Reports and Data ID: 276   Challenge: Ensuring open and preferably free access and reuse of information created through  archaeological work for the benefit of research rather than profit.   Justification: The historic environment faces unprecedented challenges in remaining relevant and  effective in a tightening financial climate. Primary evidence gathering is costly to undertake but  informs research yet as a profession we do not share information readily in formats that enable  interoperability and reuse. Constraints include protection of Intellectual Property rights (IPR), silo  mentalities and inertia. Yet the internet offers novel approaches to the rapid publishing of data, and  new technologies provide mechanisms for making sense of the vast amounts of information we  collect. Organization of information, unbound by the constraints of IPR is thus essential to stimulate  research.  [MDACS] Archiving and Access ID: 255   Challenge: Archiving and dissemination of archaeological data   Justification: As data accumulates, access is increasingly inadequate. Traditional publications fail to  give readers the detail they need. Suggest providing financial support for efforts to provide digital  data through such efforts as tDAR. TDAR is currently funded with seed money from Mellon.  Thereafter people will pay. Suggest providing financial backing to keep fees low and insure future  viability of tDAR.  [MDACS] Data Comparability ID: 348   Challenge: Attaining comparability among archaeological data sets.   Justification: Archaeology is unlikely to obtain or deserve respect or to be able to develop (without  29 

16.

17.

18.

19.

enormous efforts) broad regional syntheses without coming to terms on the data classes, units of  measure, etc. We need to move beyond Munsell!  [MDACS] Data Integration ID: 233   Challenge: Integrating observations from archaeological, ethnoarchaeological, and ethnographic  work done at varying temporal and geographic scales in order to promote comparison, to identify  patterns indicating similar adaptive states, and to develop generally applicable descriptions of  processes of culture change.   Justification: Answering any of the big questions in archaeology requires we draw upon  observations made by multiple researchers working across considerable space and time. Anyone  who has attempted to build a dataset for comparative work must have encountered the frustration  of having to figure out how descriptions (take lithic tool types for example) made in one time/place  relate to those in another time/ place. A systematic attempt to organize existing data to facilitate  large scale comparative work multiplies the value of existing data and opens the possibility that  archaeologists of the future can address much bigger questions.  [MDACS] Data Standards ID: 249   Challenge: Greater methodological standardization to facilitate productive dialogue between  researchers and maximizing the comparability of datasets and research results between multiple  regions and time periods.   Justification: While many innovative approaches to several longstanding questions have and  continue to be developed and applied as part of modern archaeological research, many projects  retain a traditional tendency towards methodological isolation. While most researchers are well  aware of what other archaeologists in their area of specialization are doing, they still tend to  proceed on their own in terms of developing new approaches. In the case of lithic usewear analysis,  some truly wonderful techniques and technologies have been brought to bear regarding the  question of quantifying forensic evidence of tool using behavior. These include several different  forms of optical microscopy (e.g. traditional incident light and laser confocal scanning microscopy),  several variants of scanning electron microscopy (e.g. traditional SEM, environmental SEM), atomic  force microscopy, and infinite focus microscopy, as well as digital image and GIS analyses. However,  as innovative and forward thinking as these approaches are, they usually do not offer any means of  relating one study to another, and therefore of evaluating one set of results against any other. As  important as furthering our understanding of a particular culture in a particular place and time is,  we also need to pay equal attention to the 'bigger picture'. That is, developing a means for  establishing broader contexts for interpretation that cover multiple geographic regions and time  periods. As long as we continue to focus our energies on a methodologically piecemeal approach to  archaeological research, we limit our ability to reconstruct the larger story of human technological  and cultural evolution. With a proper and widely accessible computational infrastructure in place,  greater methodological standardization will become a far more attainable goal, and the interpretive  fruit that such standardization will surely bear, can be more effectively disseminated globally.  [MDACS] Data Standards ID: 317   Challenge: How can cultural resource management projects (survey and testing as well as data  recovery) be compelled to conduct and present recovered data in a manner standardized enough to  be be used in crossproject regional synthesis?   Justification:  [MDACS] Data Standards ID: 361   Challenge: Archaeology needs a concise set of data standards and methodological transparency that  would allow comparison between sites. Additionally, safety standards need to be broadly applied to  sites.   Justification: Excavation methodology in Americanist archaeology is a product of outmoded ideas  regarding stratigraphy and deposition. Creating a set of standards in line with English Heritage or the  MoLAS system would greatly benefit our understanding of the past and would increase  30 

professionalism in both academic and professional archaeology.  20. [MDACS] Importance of Synthesis ID: 323   Challenge: Trends in American archaeology particularly compliance archaeology, have left us with  fragmented databases, that have resulted in intersite comparisons and syntheses that have become  the exception rather than the norm.   Justification: With cuts in funding for archaeology and archaeological regulations likely over the next  decade it is important that we wisely choose the most useful archaeological projects, the best  methodologies, and the best practitioners for investigating those projects. Decades after the  adoption of the NHPA and NEPA there is still only limited guidance as to what the "Best Practices" in  the field of archaeology should be. We need to start figuring out better ways for comparing data  collected from thousands of different sites, at different times, in different states. Right now it is  almost impossible to compare raw data collected from different sites. There is no standardized  terminology, nomenclature, collection methodologies, or databases for collecting artifact and  feature level data. With so much of the research of the past decades locked within inaccessible  "Gray Literature," it is next to impossible to know what has already been done, what is  archaeologically important, and to develop testable models. Finally, there is a wide spectrum of  quality among archaeological practitioners in the US. These range from people, companies, and  agencies that conduct excellent work to those whose work could be considered egregious examples  of archaeological malfeasance. This combination of incompetence, shady business practices, and  corruption introduces bad data, and results in a lack of faith among clients and regulators about the  importance and relevance of archaeology. We need a mechanism with "due process" to protect  individuals, yet will result in the removal of poor archaeologists and companies from continuing to  conduct "business as usual." Currently, the only professional industry standard is RPA membership  which is relatively easy to obtain and almost impossible to remove, once obtained.  21. [MDACS] Management of Primary Data ID: 294   Challenge: I think that one of the biggest challenges in archaeology is the adequate management of  primary data.   Justification: I am observing that often students and other researchers are using a large proportion  of their time and resources finding and getting access to primary data that have already been  collected but are often in obscure places and poorly organized. If those data were organized in an  orderly manner and available, or at least indexed, in a well publicized website, much more time and  resources could be used for study instead of looking for the data. David Anderson's PIDBA website is  a good example for others to imitate.  22. [MDACS] National Artifact Database ID: 301   Challenge: Construction of an artifact database for all of North America that will permit comparisons  through time and space for the entire continent. Degrees of similarity must be determined and  maintained to insure that oranges are not confused with grapefruits, and could be organized using a  taxonomic structure.   Justification: The large volume of archaeological data that has accumulated over the last 60 years in  all time periods and places has significantly reduced the " absence of evidence is not evidence of  absence" argument and permits widespread comparisons both within and across geographic and  cultural boundaries that could lead to evolutionary, adapational, or historical conclusions. Without a  standard database such conclusions lack validity.  23. [MDACS] National Database ID: 275   Challenge: Work towards a national database compiled IN COOPERATION WITH competent  programmers.   Justification: This witches brew of every archaeologist working up their own is absurd with current  computing power. Bifurcating system s can be devised to include prehistoric and historic sites as  well as the historic architecture side which is a idiotically American approach.  24. [MDACS] Preservation and Access to Data ID: 279  31 

Challenge: Anthropology in general, and archaeology in particular, must focus on developing tools  to ensure longterm preservation and public availability of cultural data.   Justification: Anthropology requires, by definition, crosscultural comparative data. Archaeology is  no different. Unfortunately, too often are data only published in summary form, they languish in  obscure technical reports, or they are simply never distributed. This problem is not new, and has  been commented on during almost every generation of archaeologists since the 1940s.  Technological advances have now made it possible to develop cybersolutions both to make data  openly available and to ensure that these data are not lost over time. Sadly, as a discipline,  archaeology has not kept apace of these changes. Recent mandates from funding sources (e.g., NSF)  regarding data sharing agreements are a step in the right direction; however, in the absence of any  single repository or dataformat standards, we risk creating a plethora of disparate, unconnected,  and incompatible online data sources. What is needed is a largescale repository for archaeological  data, including research and compliancebased archaeologies.  25. [MDACS] Unit Comparability ID: 353   Challenge: I see the issue of unit comparability to be a grand challenge for the field of archaeology.  While flexibility of unit construction contributes to investigator freedom and autonomy, clear  methods for comparisons have not emerged within the discipline. Quantitative methods for dealing  with this or some type of unit standardization seems like a logical next step within the discipline.   Justification:  26. [MDACS] Collaboration within Regions ID: 388  ·  Challenge: Collaboration within regions on small projects including CRM.  ·  Justification: Collections themselves become specialized knowledge. The formidable nature of  reanalyzing collections on the front end only to find they are not suitable for a particular research  question deters graduate students from tapping into these resources as data. 



32 

III. Issues of Practice 
A. [PAEM] Analytical & Excavation Methods 
1. [PAEM] Classification ID: 336   Challenge: Classification   Justification: I consider one of the biggest challenges is adequate classification. Why? ¶ 1. All objects  considered by archaeologists were made, used and understood in terms of a folk classification.  Trying to devise a scientific classification that realistically replicates this is exceedingly difficult. I  have been working since 1996 (and have a publishable manuscript on this study, but owing to  professional considerations (i.e. the need to eat) have not yet been able to put my results to  practical test. ¶ 2. What is needed is a classification system that both maximizes the information  that our informants can provide us with (i.e. a system that we think is one that the people of the  past might actually be able to agree with in part) and a system that allows us to use the relevant  aspects of this system for specifically archaeological purposes. ¶ 3. This is sometimes achievable  using the folk classifications  for example Roman pottery forms are known by their Roman names,  and these are used as part of archaeological classification; similarly, Chinese bronze forms. My stand  is that wherever a folk classification is available (e.g. all Pacific Island groups) then it should be  utilized. ¶ 4. Archaeologists must therefore work from the ethnographic interface backwards in time  when constructing a classification of the products of technology that we call `material culture' and  artifacts. ¶ 5. Artifacts are the visible products of a huge system of technology (c.f. Jacques Ellul  etc.). Even a chimp using a stick to fish for termites has to know a great deal about the materials,  their properties, when to use the tool, how to use the tool, etc. etc. ¶ 6. I call my proposed system  Technological Classification. ¶ More information, if needed can be sent directly to organizers.  2. [PAEM] Excavation Standards ID: 253   Challenge: Compelling cultural resource management companies to conduct research to a  consistent scientific standard.   Justification: Cultural resource management companies do the bulk of archaeological research in  the US, however there are only sparse and unevenly applied state and federal guidelines to dictate  how they do their work. One example of this is the stringent regulations NAGPRA applies to the  investigation of Native American graves, effectively preventing their excavation, while the standards  are much more vague for any other cultural group, resulting in colleagues speaking of historic  burials which were "yanked out of the ground" in the space of a week. ¶ In order to be competitive,  many successful CRM companies work to a lower standard than academic institutions, cutting  corners and even violating OSHA when it suits them. From the outside, such companies appear to be  successful, winning awards and contracts for consistently finishing projects on low budgets and on  time. In many cases, their clients are ignorant of archaeological technique, and are more concerned  with getting an "ok" from professionals so their inventory or construction projects can stay on track.  Since archaeology is by nature, destructive, it is relatively rare for a company to be called to account  for their procedure: if they write a report saying they used a specific technique consistently  throughout the project, no one can replicate their work to see if different findings are achieved. ¶  Not only do companies get away with shoddy work in this manner, the contract nature of many  projects also leaves them at liberty to treat professionals unprofessionally. The competitive nature  of permanent hiring within companies often means that PI's are highly educated but under experienced PhDs, or those whose experience is outdated. This may lead to an environment of  maintaining unreasonable expectations and attempting to manage projects remotely by people  whose time is too expensive, who don't have the time or stamina to travel into the wilderness for 10  10hourdays in a row and gain a realistic perspective on working conditions. Techs on the other  hand, though usually no less than collegeeducated, frequently travel from another state at their  own expense to take work for a few weeks to a few months. In these circumstances it can be  financially impossible to leave a project if upon arrival, one discovers that a company is behaving  unethically, exposing the crew to undue risk, compelling them to work extra hours to finish on time,  33 

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

skirting single occupancy regulations etc. With the irregular nature of archaeological work, one is  not always able to choose not to work for a company that has treated its employees poorly in the  past.  [PAEM] Geospatial Techniques for Subsurface Cultural Resource Discovery ID: 378   Challenge: (2) As to improved data acquisition, the use of nondestructive geospatial techniques to  investigate subsurface cultural resources in the US and American Southwest in particular.   Justification: (2) Geospatial methods are being used to locate and assess subsurface manifestations  of cultural resources extensively internationally, and by comparison, little in the US, especially in the  western States. Would like to see more use of such nondestructive data retrieval tools. We have  the specialists with the necessary experience in the US, but they end up traveling internationally or  only using a small suite of their capabilities, skill set, and instrumentation when working in the US.  [PAEM] Identifying Natural Resources ID: 205   Challenge: To gain an understanding of the use of the Prehistoric cultural landscape by identifying  ethnobotanical and natural resources in a geographic region. Using geodata and GIS overlays one  can identify the natural resources and then overlay the cultural properties as identified by State  Historic Preservation Offices (SHPO) and land management agencies.   Justification: As an agency archaeologist I have access to the geodata and cultural property  inventories that would be the source data to conduct the study. The cultural landscape project  would be valuable in identifying the prehistoric use of resources and establish a basis for identifying  Traditional Cultural Properties (TCPs) for Native American groups. One of the goals would be assist  the Native American groups who claim cultural affiliation to the region in connecting TCPs with their  ancestral past.  [PAEM] Lithic Assemblage Variability ID: 242   Challenge: The scientific analysis of lithic assemblage variability.   Justification: Stone tools and manufacturing debris are the oldest artifacts ever recovered, are  found worldwide, and dominate the archaeological record for much of human existence. Yet,  archaeologists fail to adequately record the variability in lithic assemblages and rarely work to  minimize inter and intraobserver error. The problem is especially keen in American CRM, which is a  "billiondollar industry" that fails to provide such basic data that allow for comparison. How can  archaeology call itself a comparative science when there is no control over the most basic data?  [PAEM] Negative Space in Stratigraphy ID: 222   Challenge: Understanding how to incorporate negative space into stratigraphy. For example, in  profile, how can an erosion surface or an unconformity be represented? How can a time period of  nondeposition be understood and graphically represented.   Justification: It seems, at least to me, that archaeologists are either not considering or not showing  erosional surfaces as units on their graphics. We're limiting ourselves to only thinking about  stratigraphy in a depositional sense. In certain environments, erosion is a major formation process.  Profile graphics (1 or 2 per report/article) are often the main figures in an archaeological document  and people quickly glance at the pictures to get the general conclusions and data. We need to talk  about erosional surfaces as their own units representing time.  [PAEM] Research Design ID: 210   Challenge: Funding for archaeology in the U.S. is mostly centered on salvage of sites to be impacted  by federally funded projects. Yet, most sites caught in this process are of limited value and  contribute very little to our understanding of North American prehistory. At the same time, high value sites not threatened by federal projects, are still rapidly disappearing due to expanding  urbanization, modern agricultural techniques and generally from the impacts of an ever increasing  population. The challenge would be to shift funding to a grand strategy to preserve or salvage key  sites in the U.S. irrespective of the traditional concerns of federallymandated salvage projects.   Justification:  [PAEM] Research Design ID: 271  34 

Challenge: Proportionality: how do we justify expenditure of public funds in a time recession  Justification: At a time of public funding constraints and developer conservatism how does one  justify or at least ensure proportionality in developer led archaeological endeavors ?. ¶ One answer  is to ensure appropriate actions and justification would be an objective to define spatially driven  research agendas (local, regional, national, international frameworks) to drive acceptability from  developers and public, proportionate activity, and efficient, more effective, use of funding; using the  presentation of gains and value by academic achievement to counter the argument of  archaeologists as collectors, with more data than they know what to do with, and full museums. ¶  Alternatively we can keep with the current UK situation of monitoring based on guess work and  scanty or unevenly distributed evidence, poorly explained justifications and remain in conflict with  our clients.  9. [PAEM] Residues ID: 362   Challenge: Residues on artifacts should be routinely identified and analyzed, just like the artifacts  themselves.   Justification: Chemical residues on potsherds excavated in Chaco Canyon indicate the ancient  ceramic vessels contained a chocolate beverage. The ancient beverage undoubtedly contained other  ingredients as well, as yet not identified. Artifacts of all kinds should be routinely examined for  chemical traces of their ancient use.  10. [PAEM] Taphonomic Processes ID: 307   Challenge: To better understand the taphonomic processes that happen on archaeological sites. Too  many archaeologists assume that material culture is redolent with cultural information. (We all think  this is important.) But in reality most cultural material has undergone an enormous amount of  physical movement, fragmentation, decay (diagenisis) so that the detectable traces very distant  from the lives of the people who occupied sites in the past. We need more forensic style research to  explore this. Sieving, biochemical analysis etc. all have important roles. We also need to ensure that  enough material is preserved in situ for future generations of archaeologists.   Justification: I hope the above says it all concisely. However, Michael Schiffer's cultural and natural  transforms is a good place to start for those interested. Site formation processes, geoarchaeological  techniques and proteomics all have a role. ¶ I'd also suggest a programme deliberately searches out  sites where you have a range of depositional environments. Shipwrecks (time capsules),  waterlogged settlement sites, gradual accumulation with excellent preservation of organic material  to dry sites where only most robust materials are preserved. ¶ Burial sites, habitation sites (long  term and transitory) all important. ¶ I'd like to see the programme use sites from a wide range of  ecosystems.  11. [PAEM] Research Design ID: 219   Challenge: In my opinion the biggest problem facing archaeology (worldwide) is the accumulation of  data with no research plan artifacts, samples, associated materials that are collected because they  are there, because the more stuff the more one can charge for processing & analysis. Research  design has fallen out of fashion even in many academic settings and is nearly absent in most CRM  projects I have been involved in. Digitizing data for the sake of having digitized data is neither  scientific nor helpful.   Justification: 

 

B. [PDTT] Deficiencies in Theory & Training 
1. [PDTT] [PIP] ID: 321   Challenge: I believe a grand challenge is to develop a broad inclusive philosophical perspective of  how, why, and who does the archaeological interpretation of the past. This entails not only  accepting the values, input, and controls of descendent communities but a willingness to make our  work relevant to the broadest public possible so that public resources can be spent on effective and  meaningful work. This would be greatly facilitated by a centralized information storage entity that  could keep track of all kinds of existing and future data. The system would have to be one that  35 

2.

3.

4.

5.

would allow for significant variability in data format as it does not make sense to rework information  to fit database boxes   Justification: There already exists an enormous amount of summary and raw data as well as extant  curated collections of artifacts and samples that are inadequately used for contemporary research  and thus inadequately curated. We should consider a significant reduction if not a moratorium on  new data collection until this situation is corrected. This includes consideration of nontraditional  approaches to site impact mitigation measures associated with construction and other resource  disturbing activities. Better awareness of, and access to these resources, as well as meaningful  oversight of their use by descendent communities would do a great deal toward making our work  valuable to the public. The general perception is that archaeological studies are still primarily the  playground of the uppermiddle class, male, WASPs. We need to make our work relevant to more  people and to more contemporary global environmental and cultural issues.  [PDTT] ID: 201   Challenge: To deconstruct the boundary between theoretical and scientific archaeologies   Justification: To integrate more comprehensively findings from different archaeological subfield,  especially between those that fall on either side of the humanities/natural sciences divide.  [PDTT] ID: 224   Challenge: Archaeological Foundations: exploring the veracity of popular assumptions in  archaeology that form the basis to important issues in our discipline.   Justification: Archaeologists use a variety of assumptions to link method, theory, and grand ideas.  These include concepts such as "efficiency," "mobility patterning," and "village." Efficiency is a term  that is so broadly used in so many different contexts that it's meaning is no longer clear. For  example, lithic efficiency implies conservation of raw materials such as using bifaces as cores. Yet  this key concept is an assumption with little hard data to support or negate the idea. Efficiency is  also used to in the contexts of human ecology and energetic efficiency, and many other contexts. Do  humans really strive to be efficient? Mobility patterning is often reduced to logistical vs. residential  systems although ethnographic and theoretical literature may indicate a much more complex  construction. Simplifying what may be complex construction could be obscuring critical insights on  modeling prehistoric lifeways. Similarly, the term village is frequently used without rigorous  definitions. For some, a village is occupied six months out of year, while essentially permanent for  other scholars. Also of importance, how do we recognize a village in the archaeological record and  distinguish it from an aggregation site or a site that was annually reused for a short time.  Archaeologist often assume midden soils, high artifact density, and a large site size are a defining  factor in identifying villages although this could also be a result of annual reoccupation or  aggregation for a short period of time. Unless we come to better understand the variety of  assumptions archaeologists are using along with the validity of those ideas, our foundations to  answering the grand ideas will remain just out of reach. Grand ideas in archaeology deserve  grand/solid foundations to get there.  [PDTT] ID: 260   Challenge: The major objective or peril of the archaeologists and their works: from academic  perspective to professional on environmental studies.   Justification: Increase of remains without good analyses; professionals with a poor formation and  background; low time to study and interpret the findings; absence of good researchers and theory  because of this challenge of perspective.  [PDTT] ID: 263   Challenge: Education, education, education! And the humbleness that comes with education.  American archaeologists are among some of the most poorly educated bourgeoisie I know, yet they  are the ones who drive CRM. They know nothing about art, philology, literature, logic, or even  theatre. It is not amusing hearing them parrot Europeans who are way more educated, and have  been inculcated in their own cultural history since high school.  36 

Justification: Science, and critical intelligence, is the biggest challenge facing archaeology in the 21st  century. In the face of the most rapid change in technology and social organization since the early  20th C., archaeologists apparently have almost nothing to contribute to public policy or have  nothing to say about how to live the good life in a democratic capitalist society  in fact, most  Americanist archaeologist seem to have no idea they are living in an historically unique society. For a  historical discipline, that's inexcusable.  6. [PDTT] ID: 270   Challenge: To encourage archaeologists to see that the discipline is a science, not an arts subject.   Justification: There is a tendency for archaeology to be taught (at least in the UK) effectively as an  arts subject  and as an extension of the history of art. Studies are heavily artifact based, and those  in the commercial sector use terminology and methods of thinking from the mid20th century, such  as culturehistoricism and migrationism. There is a need for thinking to be updated, for the discipline  to become much more science based in terms of thinking and methodology (as opposed to a call for  more scientific techniques to be used).  7. [PDTT] ID: 277   Challenge: Creating a solid basis for the contribution to contemporary society formation  archaeology can make: this includes addressing long term processes connected to the present,  finding a scientific process to study empirical information with the aim of social and cultural  understanding, and disseminate the inherent contradiction in the natural and social side of  archaeological conduct.   Justification: The discipline is currently increasingly dragged into the study of particulars and details  which are seemingly detached from societal interest, whereas the big questions on ongoing human  processes and the evidence for their development that can only be studied by archaeology are often  ignored. The scientific conduct within the discipline suffers from two main related issues. The first, is  the unclear separation of the knowledge production of natural science and the knowledge  production of social science. Both the scientific process and the type of knowledge produced are  incommensurable and currently cause a lot of confusion in the way research is designed and funded.  At the same time future development of the discipline should make sure a separation will lead to  mutually constructive collaborations. The second is the suffering of the development within  disciplinary thought of the 'tolerance trap' or the concealed relativism and separatism of eclectic  approaches in theory and method. Currently the discipline at large seems to accept uncritically that  incommensurable ideas will lead to solid arguments on the basis of loose connections to  subsequently employed methods. Students are currently taught to blindly follow this trap and this  stalls the development of the discipline and critical thought. The disciplines reaction to post modernism currently results in very similar, unsupported research constructions. This contributes to  the inability of the discipline to prove its societal relevance and to address the core comparative  intellectual challenges through time and space.  8. [PDTT] ID: 282   Challenge: I think the biggest challenge for archaeology is its lack of an overarching conceptual  framework that would allow us to assign meaning to pattern derived empirically. As things stand  now (and I am speaking globally), and unlike the life sciences, there are 45 competing paradigms  (e.g., culture history  dominant worldwide; behavioral ecology, evolutionary archaeology, dual  inheritance theory, etc.) that differ profoundly from one another in terms of their preconceptions  and assumptions about what the past was like. Not a particularly good way to 'do science', but  'doing science' is not the goal of many archaeologies.   Justification: I will confine my remarks to an archaeology that aspires to be 'sciencelike'. I define  science as a collection of methods for evaluating the empirical sufficiency of knowledge claims  about the world of sense experience. Epistemology (how we know what we think we know about  the remote human past) in general, and the logic of inference, in particular, are practically always  implicit in archaeology, yet the biases, preconceptions, and assumptions that underlie them affect  37 



research at every level or stage in the research process (what constitutes data, how pattern is to be  defined and interpreted). If explanation is our goal, we can only assign meaning to pattern in terms  of an overarching conceptual framework. Evolutionary biology is the overarching conceptual  framework that unifies the life sciences worldwide. Archaeology doesn't have a unifying conceptual  framework; it's still waiting for its Darwin. Since meaning comes from humans, and not from nature,  meaning can only be assigned to pattern. It is not an intrinsic feature of pattern. Since archaeology  doesn't have such a framework, we have no basis for assigning meaning to pattern. Meaning is 'up  for grabs', so to speak, and we usually resort to posthoc accommodation (meaning derived  inductively after an analysis is completed) in order to explain pattern. The problem with these  purely inductive approaches is that explanation acquires credibility only within the confines of a  research tradition, and might be absurd outside it. This is a complex problem bound up in implicit  differences in the meaning of a central concept like 'culture' across distinct, but overlapping,  research traditions; our lack of a universal metalanguage (like mathematics) that might transcend  research communities, and a number of other historical factors. While posthoc accommodation is  to some extent unavoidable in a poorly axiomatized discipline like archaeology, our research designs  would be stronger if we were to build a deductive component into our research protocols. That  would help, but the biggest problem is the lack of a conceptual framework. I've argued that we don't  have one, we need one, and whatever form it might take, that it's parameters should be consistent  with the core concepts of evolutionary biology, the most powerful conceptual framework ever  devised to account for the origins and development of life on earth. There are some 'proto paradigms' floating around that are consistent with evolutionary biology. They include behavioral  ecology, evolutionary ecology, evolutionary psychology, and dualinheritance theory. Methodology  by itself, no matter how sophisticated (and I'm thinking here of agentbased modeling and other  simulation approaches), can never overcome the lack of an overarching conceptual framework.  9. [PDTT] ID: 285   Challenge: Combining theory and practice. There is a lot of theoretical discussions in archaeology,  but mostly it is an isolated branch of its own. Archaeological practice (e.g. excavations, laboratory  examinations) is hardly influenced by theoretical discussions as well as theories are hardly ever  tested against and applied to practical work and/or concrete examples.   Justification:  10. [PDTT] ID: 288   Challenge: Apathy prevailing amongst academics and institute technicians, leading all the way back  to school formation and universities general education in archaeology maybe one reason is the  holding of old archaeological theoretical regional models prevailing over. I will like to see more  aperture in universities, institutes, more flexibility towards themes less explored or totally unknown  but that are important to archaeology operation and functionality within the society. I will like to  see more evolution in concepts, ideas, behaviors of professionals and technicians. More  preparations in English and less fear to the American neighbors, or other concepts, ideas and  behaviors from the outside word.   Justification: there is a huge hole in which Mexican archaeology is in...but is not new... this has been  going on since the last decades. but no one can or do nothing, why is that? I may ask. what is it that  universities are teaching that aren´t changing the curricula towards the incorporation of new ideas,  behaviors and concepts? is not the main scenario o formation again, based in the universities  curricula provide us with the means and ways to make better things... I believe university can be the  scenario from where we should act.  11. [PDTT] ID: 290   Challenge: Observation is recognition. Methodologies derive from paradigms, which are embedded  in our socialization as well as training. The grand challenge is to get archaeologists willing and  capable to think outside these boxes, our customary paradigms.   Justification: Archaeology has been gradually shifting toward postcolonial perspectives. American  38 

12.

13.

14.

15.

archaeology was illserved by the pseudoscientific ("physics envy") New Archaeology of the  generation passing. Encompassing nonWestern worldviews is slowly opening the practice of  archaeology, and a grand challenge is to meld a nonWestern worldview with the practice of  archaeology (as Eldon Yellowhorn is attempting). Archaeologists need to understand the sociology  of science, the rhetorics commonly used, how hypotheses should derive from empirical  observations (as C.S. Peirce argued, not the other way as Hempel claimed). Archaeologists need  familiarity with cultural and historical geographers and ethnohistorians. Perhaps RPA could conduct  regular inservice conferences such as lawyers and doctors attend to maintain their licenses to  broaden practitioners' base of anthropological knowledge and capacity to hypothesize from non Western worldviews as well as conventional Enlightenment rationality.  [PDTT] ID: 292   Challenge: Abandon the post processual mantra that permits archaeologists to honor any idea of  what constitutes an explanation. Focus upon developing an archaeology whose practitioners  actually do science. Of course there are many definitions of science. But, the productive sciences  (whatever their intellectual, historical, justifications) always rely upon the ability to organize  empirical data to demonstrate functional interrelationships subject to intersubjective testability as  the foundation upon which to decide which puzzles to try to solve, which interpretations of those  interrelationships they chose to support, and which other to accept as not yet shown to be false.   Justification: Forget the analysis of history, archaeology, philosophy of science, and detailed  methodological discussion underpinning some conclusion that there are 1,000,000 instead of  1,000,500 angels dancing on the head of a pin. ¶ Much of the negative reaction to the beginning of a  scientific archaeology called processualnewwhatever archaeology was a result, in my opinion, of  the emotional, subjective discomfort with "ignoring the human, psychological component" of  human experience. That discomfort resulted in many forms of postprocessual archaeology whose  adherents accepted virtually any "explanation" as valid even though its proponent had no  interacting empirical data that could be tested and the proposed explanation refuted ... making  those forms of archaeology composed of pictures that any other person was free to interpret as  they chose, again with no empirical substance to their different interpretation. The result: an  archaeology whose proponents were/are an analog to the proponents of creationism. If that is what  the profession chooses to call archaeology, then it should be called an "art," not an endeavor that  seeks "explanation and understanding" of anything.  [PDTT] ID: 320   Challenge: The grand challenge for archaeology in the immediate future is to bring it back to the  basics of fieldwork and artifact study and away from the obsession with abstract pseudosociological  theorizing based on minimal evidence. To achieve this more thorough, rigorous, groundwork for  students needs to be given; they should be taught the distinction between imaginative  interpretation and unsubstantiated storytelling.   Justification: A survey of university reading lists shows the urgent necessity for this  [PDTT] ID: 328   Challenge: Creating a more inclusive archaeology which challenges and involves the entire diversity  of citizens in the investigation and learning about our past including nonmaterial aspects of our  heritage and cultures.   Justification: Science, including archaeology, needs to find ways to engage the public, increase  scientific (and archaeological) literacy, by making findings and opportunities to participate in  investigations more accessible to all people. After all archaeology is about people.  [PDTT] ID: 338   Challenge: Merge technohistory into all facets of archaeology   Justification: Training in historical arch is domestic sites oriented, so when confronted with  something outside that realm, chaos ensues, there is no theoretical or practical underpinning to  technology and how it changes the archaeological record.  39 

16. [PDTT] ID: 340   Challenge: Computational infrastructure will not address the key scientific problem in archaeology,  which is to develop a natively archaeological theory rather than borrowing and misapplying theory  developed in other disciplines. It can assist by providing archaeologists who are trained in  programming methods to apply new theoretical constructs to the vast data sets that have  developed in public archaeology. I see the problem primarily in providing the needed training to the  entire upcoming generation of archaeologists rather than any grand hardware based initiative or an  attempt to have a computationally trained elite provide tools that the rest would apply with limed  understanding of their purpose   Justification:  17. [PDTT] ID: 343   Challenge: The grand challenge in archaeology today is "knowing what we know" Students,  consultants, and academes (not necessarily mutually exclusive) produce an immense amount of  data every year; without broad syntheses and centralized indexing, we have no way to know if our  studies are new and innovative, or repetitious and redundant.   Justification:  18. [PDTT] ID: 376   Challenge: Incorporate industrial archaeology into the mainstream.   Justification: Archaeologists tend to be trained in domestic site archaeology and don't know  anything about industrial archaeology and tend to vastly underestimate the problems with the  result that they read a few secondary sources, get it wrong and because SHPO staff also are  unaware, inaccuracies perpetuate themselves.  19. [PDTT] ID: 386   Challenge: 2. Archaeologists are increasingly letting their scientific analyses do their thinking for  them.   Justification: For item 2, we are cranking out large numbers of 'pilot' studies using increasingly  sophisticated analytical techniques, but all too often on the basis of a handful of samples on one  hand, and a lack of understanding of the limitations of the methods on the other, as archaeologists  we are coming u with poorly supported conclusions.  C. [PIP] Indigenous Perspectives  1. [PIP] ID: 221   Challenge: Consideration of above ground stone and earth sites, astronomical alignments, and oral  tradition from Native American people need to be considered as well as digging in the ground for  artifacts.   Justification: Archeology comes from the broader study of Anthropology, the study of people.  Archeology needs to consider a broader base of information to get a true picture of how people long  ago lived. Astronomical sites exist world wide as a calendar system. Above ground stone sites and  earth sites are key to figuring out ceremonial sites that are often astronomically aligned. Native  American oral tradition is vital to follow threads of important legacy. Without a greater  consideration of information archeologist are only getting a partial picture. The time is now to  enhance the field work to include this.  2. [PIP] ID: 318   Challenge: Adequately addressing and teaching upcoming professionals how to deal respectfully  and appropriately with diverse perspectives on the past and ways of knowing. Currently, the  lessons/approach seem to be "Be PC" and "just ignore these differences."   Justification: My experience has been predominately in dealing with different perspectives on  Native American knowledge and input on archaeological issues in the United States. Sadly, rather  than recognize that, even though there are many diverse perspectives, and that these will not  always reconcile, several other approaches seem to prevail: Ignore the issue and make sure our  paths don't cross; Give in to "this" (usually some issue dealing with human remains) and maybe we'll  40 

be allowed to do "that;" We have so much to be guilty about, let's not argue and use that as our  mea culpa. ¶ Such approaches are in themselves disrespectful and patronizing. They also ignore the  opportunities to share knowledge, learn from a different perspective, and interact as professionals.  I'm not saying we haven't made progress in this regard, but I do believe that, not only does this need  to be part of the explicit dialogue of the field, but that the leadership of SAA in particular has spent  many recent years headinsand so that it doesn't have to wonder about how to address the issue of  whether its actions and approaches reflect those of its membership, and whether it could or should  affect positive change in this regard.  3. [PIP] ID: 329   Challenge: How can archaeology move away from its Eurocentric colonial bias and encourage and  promote indigenous archaeology? ¶ How can archaeology move toward encouraging participatory  action research between archaeologists and descendant communities?   Justification:  4. [PIP] ID: 363   Challenge: How do we remain professionally and ethically relevant to descendant groups, the  general public, students of all ages, and ourselves?   Justification: Our profession often seems selfserving and directed toward research questions that  are of interest to archaeologists but are either not understood or not of interest to descendants of  cultures we study and the public (usually curious about archaeology and in many cases paying the  bills for either CRM projects or university salaries). How do we generate interest in cultural and site  conservation throughout the educational system and with the public to ensure that archaeological  resources are protected because of both their cultural and scientific importance.  5. [PIP] ID: 381   Challenge: Integrating Indigenous perspectives into interpretations of the archaeological past  without sounding imperialist or colonialist   Justification: This is a significant problem in Australia due to its history of colonization, denigration  of Indigenous culture and the fracturing of that culture by past (and present) colonial practices that  leave Aboriginal people marginalized and disregarded by the dominant culture. 

D. [PIR] Interdisciplinary Research 
1. [PIR] ID: 246   Challenge: Integrating the many and varied fields of anthropology and archaeology and natural  sciences and computer sciences.   Justification: The Dept. of Integrated Biology at U. Calif.Berkeley is an example of a truly 21st century scientific enterprise that understands the importance of ramifying research. Its founder and  chair, Marvalee Wake, crusades for this. Wake and I have organized a session for this year's Am.  Anthropological Association meeting, in San Francisco, to bring members of her faculty and  anthropologists together to explore integrating research in this everramifying model. She can  provide some of her papers on integrating biology and biology with other sciences. A very major  problem in anthropology/archaeology is the expectation that only singleauthored books or major  papers should count for tenure, promotion, or employment. This counterproductive criterion must  be combatted, and NSF is a good agent to do so.  2. [PIR] ID: 247   Challenge: The integration of archaeological information with ethnographic, historic, and traditional  information.   Justification: As currently practiced particularly in CRM circles, archaeological information is isolated  from other sources of information rather than integrated into the whole of available knowledge.  This results in a narrowing of the field and a growing disconnect from the social utility formerly  touted by practitioners.  3. [PIR] ID: 248   Challenge: Archaeology is an invaluable tool as part of a larger structure of "prehistoric" studies. It  41 

is, however, too narrow a focus to stand alone in the challenge of understanding the undocumented  human past.   Justification: It is imperative that additional highly structured sciences of genetics, physics,  architecture, engineering, biology, sociology, etc. be applied for the most comprehensive  interpretation of evidence from antiquity. Each of these sciences has its own evolved language,  accumulated body of learning and network for sharing new research. Objective interpretation is  impossible if the methodology is confined to only one modern discipline.  4. [PIR] ID: 257   Challenge: The technical achievements of ancient civilizations are largely not recognized,  understood or reported accurately due to lack of technical subject matter in archaeological  coursework. Consequently field data taken is largely descriptive rather than analyzed for  engineering/scientific principles that ancient civilizations had understood on an empirical basis and  put into practice.   Justification: As many archaeological discoveries in years ahead lie at the interface of different  disciplines, archaeological training needs to be deepened to include some basic physics,  mathematics and engineering coursework otherwise students with only classical training will be  unable to understand specialist contributions and their relevance to interpretation of a society's use  of technology to solve sustainability problems. In short, too many social interpretations and  speculative theories for societal change absent of an understanding of the technologies and  innovations employed by societies to solve sustainability problems and deliver progress to their  people. 

E. [PMJG] Money, Jobs & Government 
1. [PMJG] ID: 235   Challenge: In order to slash prices and stay competitive in the CRM world, I see a growing trend of  compliance over science.   Justification: CRM companies often use formulaic approaches to projects of similar nature such as  cell towers, or solar farms, writing 75% of the report before the take a step onto the project area.  Projects are carried out with thin and inexperienced crews, with some companies using single  person shovel test crews or conducted surface collections using 30 foot intervals. This only hurts the  legitimate companies trying to do the right thing.  2. [PMJG] ID: 245   Challenge: 1) permanent job positions for those archaeologists w/ m.s. or PhDs ¶ 2) federal land  management agencies not following cultural resource laws   Justification: 1) permanent job positions for those archaeologists w/ mos. or PhDs ¶ I and others  with my qualifications (M.Sc./ABD and 13 years experience can't get better than a temporary job  with no benefits), which is a paltry return on such an expensive educational investment. ¶ 2) federal  land management agencies not following cultural resource laws. ¶ BLM consistently begins projects  in WA/OR without completing survey work let alone reporting.  3. [PMJG] ID: 264   Challenge: One of the biggest problems in archaeology in the UK is the lack of jobs, many people are  leaving university with a degree in archaeology and no chance of a job in the industry. One of the  other biggest problems is lack of storage for archaeological artifacts.   Justification: The job market in the UK is not good at present and for anyone in archaeology is non existent. It is a real shame as people will go into other areas and we will lose expertise.  4. [PMJG] ID: 272   Challenge: Government regulation over archeological sites.   Justification: Abuse of power in our government is protecting many sites from excavation and or  study.  5. [PMJG] ID: 280   Challenge: Representing archaeology to the public as not exclusively limited to Indiana Jones/male  42 

6.

7.

8.

9.

practitioners. This will be tough given that despite more than 50% of archaeologists being female  the ratio of your own panel is 5:1 male. Sigh.   Justification: Most social sciences and most sciences are acutely aware of the representation of the  discipline through its practitioners. Yet archaeology is one of the least diverse fields (in terms of the  ethnicity of practitioners) and least attentive to representation (despite the fact that more than half  of archaeology graduate students, for example, are female). Our field loses credibility when we  appear to be stuck in 19th century paradigm of highly educated males using an authoritative voice  to explain the past.  [PMJG] ID: 296   Challenge: Poor pay and working conditions for field archaeologists caused by competitive  tendering for projects and intense undercutting by archaeological contracting companies.   Justification: Poor pay and conditions for field staff in contacting archaeology. Some archaeological  contractors exploit field archaeologists by offering short term contracts or expect staff to be self  employed at well below IfA approved day rates knowing that with the economy in its current state  and archaeological jobs at a premium they will be able to 'get away with it'. Lack of pension  provision, unpaid travel time and use of volunteers in place of employed staff all further highlight  the problem. The problems are exacerbated by the attitudes of some archaeological consultants  who appear to have no interest preserving/recording the archaeological resource, just saving their  clients money. Archaeology is a service most developers do not wish to pay for so price not quality  nearly always determines the award of contracts. Most clients do not know how to distinguish  quality of the archaeological 'product'. ¶ Low pay and conditions leads to low morale for site staff  which in turn leads to a poorer quality of archaeological fieldwork as there is a constant loss of  skilled field archaeologists who seek more stable jobs outside archaeology. The skills base being lost  to archaeology now will be sorely missed 510 years in the future. Skilled field archaeologists should  be seen as integral to the success of a project, not a disposable resource that can be easily replaced.  It is possible to create a different structural model for an archaeological company where the  excavators are the key to the success of the company and are suitably rewarded with a structured  career grade however this would never work in the present archaeological market. ¶ The IfA  appears toothless, unable or unwilling to deal with these issues.  [PMJG] ID: 310   Challenge: NAGPRA regulations in the U.S. and similar regulations in other countries hinders the  collection of archaeological and physical anthropological data.   Justification: Unless NAGPRA or similar regulations are reversed or loosened, archaeologists and  physical anthropologists will not be able to collect new data. Furthermore, existing material in  museum collections will be returned to local people, and therefore lost to future researchers.  [PMJG] ID: 349   Challenge: What are the American people going to do with the growing number of archaeological  sites that have not fully evaluated for National Register eligibility?   Justification: Public land management agencies at all government levels face a huge backlog of  unevaluated sites that they choose to manage as eligible, and many sites that were determined  eligible by archaeologists who failed to provide the research questions to validate their  determinations. As recreation and resource needs expand, these sites might eliminate thousands of  acres from access or development. While not necessarily a bad thing for archaeology, these  stumbling points for future use of public resources might turn an already anxious citizenry against  the protection of valuable sites. There is already talk of turning some federal public lands back to the  states to use as they see fit, and the budget for cultural resource management is stretched very thin.  This nonrenewable resource, hidden in our Nation's forest, park, and open lands, needs to be  assessed for future protection, data recovery, and loss.  [PMJG] ID: 356   Challenge: The lack of experienced/seasoned mentors in CRM firms is leading to a generation of  43 

professionals who do not grow professionally and produce worthless or inaccurate  interpretations.... if an interpretation is given at all.   Justification: Examine the number of firms doing CRM who are staffed by people almost entirely  under 30. I relished working for firms with accomplished archaeologists so that I could learn from  the best. Too many firms are run by people who are not trained to work in the region they are in  and hire inexperienced principal investigators fresh out of a MA programs to save a buck. These PIs  are typically running crews with more experience than they have!  F. [PPRP] Physical Resource Protection  1. [PPRP] [PITP] ID: 373   Challenge: Archaeologists need to develop guidelines and to give far more consideration to the  question of when excavation is appropriate and when excavation puts archaeological remains at  great risk. The discipline needs to sort out its roles and responsibilities in terms of data recovery  versus preservation in place. A related challenge is that archaeologists need to approach their  relationships with indigenous people and descendent populations with perspectives influenced by  equitability and meaningful partnership.   Justification: A range of recent events have illustrated the vulnerability of archaeological property in  various regions of the world. Whether it is looting activity in the American west or the effects of  conflict on archaeological property throughout the Middle East, we are finding that archaeological  sites, even in areas that we thought were stable and protected can be gravely endangered with very  little warning. One of the unfortunate realities is that archaeological sites that have been excavated   even excavated sites that have been prepared and hardened for tourism are more vulnerable than  sites that are still buried. At a recent conference at the American Academy in Rome that focused on  preservation in crisis areas, there was a consensus that excavation was not a solution for future  archaeological preservation in these situations. There are also examples where sound partnerships  between western archaeologists and host nation personnel have resulted in site preservation and  regional stability. Archaeologists who work in crisis areas are discovering that there is a tremendous  amount of work that can be done in terms of inventory and capacity building for heritage  management programs. These approaches can also result in impressive and unexpected site  discoveries as well as new knowledge. Responsible archaeologists may be looking at a paradigm  shift where approaches to new research may need to move away from excavation as the primary  tool for data collection.  2. [PPRP] ID: 203   Challenge: 2) problems in archaeological practice in countries where original population are  3. [PPRP] ID: 209   Challenge: The grand challenge I foresee is to develop and orient the scientific technology to study  climatic change, sea temperature fluctuation, and the rising sea levels around the North American  continent before the exposed archaeological sites in the 0 to 4 meter elevation are inundated and  unavailable for study. Scripps Institute of Oceanography has scientific evidence these forces have  been in process for the past 5,000 years and are accelerating with predicted sea level rise of at least  4 meters in the next century, yet few archaeologists have responded to the crisis that thousands of  archaeological sites, buildings, and real estate will be lost when the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers  responds.   Justification: Global sea level rise from rising temperatures, sea level temperature fluctuations,  melting glaciers, and other forces threaten entire coastal cities and will virtually eliminate thousands  of archaeological sites. The response of federal agencies to attempt to protect those cities will result  in massive landform damage that will impact coastal archaeology sites. The opportunity to study  coastal archaeology sites for evidence of the rise of this process over the past 5,000 years will  decrease as this process accelerates in the next five decades. Scripps Institute of Oceanography  began collecting marine shell, diatom, and other data from archaeological sites in the 1950s, yet few  archaeologists have focused modern computer technology toward studying these effects or building  44 

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

models for interpretation. Pat Masters of Scripps Institute of Oceanography has been working with  California archaeologists for the past 35+ years to compile baseline data, but few researchers have  joined in this grand challenge or sought assistance from federal agencies. The problem will become  a national crisis the next 30years and will affect human population demographics, food chain supply  systems, and have an enormous impact on the national economy.  [PPRP] ID: 211   Challenge: Providing funding for the storage and archive of archaeological finds, with public access  and written documentation of every excavation/exploration   Justification: There is a clear shortage of storage and accessibility for many artifacts, in many  voluntary organizations such as the Council for British Archaeology, they look to fund archaeology  from grass roots level upwards, but the main hindrance is what to do with the finds afterwards, in  an ideal world industrial knowledge (say from a corporation who has a catalogue of many items)  could educate and pass on their business program to aid archaeological "warehousing" in each  country so that research, business and education could utilize the resources. A central system is  required  [PPRP] ID: 238   Challenge: In California archaeology and ethnography many artifact collections and field notes of  early ethnographers remain in dusty archives or in less than adequate University labs and archives.  Although some efforts have been made over the last couple of decades to inventory and accession  these materials, it remains unpublished. Instead of creating new research projects, have students,  and their professors for that matter, address this shortcoming in a serious fashion.   Justification: It really is not complicated to understand the importance of primary data. This data is  what generates the research questions. To simply get the information into useable descriptive  formats can be a huge contribution.  [PPRP] ID: 268   Challenge: England: protecting the buried heritage; ensuring archaeological considerations are  properly safeguarded in current and forthcoming town and country planning measures  a high point  was PPG16 and subsequent replacement legislation and guidance are weaker for archaeology;  somehow raising standards in archaeological fieldwork and dissemination  'regulators' cannot  achieve this as evidenced by recent failures of regulators in other sectors, e.g. banking   Justification: England: protecting the buried heritage; ensuring archaeological considerations are  property safeguarded in current and forthcoming town and country planning measures  a high  point was PPG16 and subsequent replacement legislation and guidance are weaker for archaeology;  somehow raising standards in archaeological fieldwork and dissemination  'regulators' cannot  achieve this as evidenced by recent failures of regulators in other sectors, e.g. banking  [PPRP] ID: 274   Challenge: Verifying the locations of the remaining, probably significant archaeological sites in the  United States, and devising measures for their protection.   Justification: While we have over 100 years of archaeological survey to identify sites, subsequent  development and natural activities have eliminated many sites. We need to know what we have left  in order to prioritize the preservation of those rare survivors.  [PPRP] ID: 303   Challenge: Basic archaeological inventory, salvage/rescue fieldwork, dating, establishment of type  series and setting out some initial crossboundary research agendas for African archaeology,  particularly in subSaharan Africa. This would involve close collaboration between local expert  archaeologists, longterm training programs in capacity building & archaeological skills for the next  generation of incountry African archaeologists, enhanced and enactable legislation/institutional  strengthening and targeted funding to assure the longterm conservation of sites and archaeological  archives.   Justification: At present, research is restricted to a few very limited 'keyhole' views or shortterm  45 

9.

10.

11.

12.

projects initiated by foreign academics. The complicated flows of prehistory and protohistory are  neglected in favor of the pat and emotive narratives of early man, rock art, pyramids, Islam and  slavery. Ongoing industrial and commercial development is leading to the irreplaceable loss of  swathes of information about Africa's roots, and limited university funding for archaeology means  that the next generation of African archaeologists is increasingly thin on the ground. ¶ In the face of  growing industrial development, 'cultural heritage' is often only addressed as a very minor subtopic  in Environmental & Social Impact Assessments. It is frequently tackled by sociologists or  environmental generalists. Combined with limited governmental/funder scrutiny, this can lead to  extensive damage of archaeological resources. ¶ Given diminishing world resources and increasing  investor focus on Africa's 'untapped' wealth, the continent with the weakest active heritage  protection regimes is facing massive environmental challenges from powerful interests. Establishing  local, community based and sustainable archaeology and cultural heritage protection, inventory,  research and management programs is key to the longterm survival of sites, the proper  investigation of archaeological remains and the appropriate, truthful and enthusiastic dissemination  of the stories of Africa's pasts.  [PPRP] ID: 347   Challenge: protecting the resource until research can take place   Justification: If sites don't exist, the most elegant research designs can't take place.  [PPRP] ID: 359   Challenge: 1 The curation and conservation of archaeological collections  artifacts, notes, photos,  etc.  worldwide.   Justification: Funding agencies have always given top priority to fieldwork. This is important, of  course, but so too is the longterm integrity of collections and their supporting documentation that  have been collected throughout the world over the past half century, often with NSF support.  Existing storage and curatorial facilities are inadequate, especially outside the "First World", and  many important collections have been lost. This is especially important given the rapid destruction  of the archaeological record in many parties of the world: in many cases, existing collections are all  the archaeological material we will ever have from many prehistoric sites and features and  landscapes.  [PPRP] ID: 385   Challenge: 1. Archaeological sites are a nonrenewable resource, rapidly declining.   Justification: My concerns are about pragmatic issues of 'how' we do archaeology, not 'what' we  should be doing in research. ¶ For item 1, look at Mexico City, for example the the difficult of finding  formative cultural information owing to the intensive urbanization.  [PPRP] ID: 387   Challenge: Almost all scientific disciplines are judged at base by how they value, and take care of  their data. Examination of their data through time is used to further the discipline and frankly  structures the discipline. Archaeologists in general do not value their collections and it shows. If we  are to move forward and not keep excavating the same kinds of sites then we need to have a  national strategy and series of goals on what to collect and what to curate. It is sad to report that  currently less than 40% of our collections have ever been studied and reported.   Justification: A national strategy for curating our collections flows from three indisputable facts. We  do not know what we have. We have an incomplete idea in North America of what we know(less  than 40% of the collections scientifically examined), and we definitely have an incomplete idea of  what we do not know. How can this be a science? ¶ To right our discipline we need a national  curation program that works with practicing scientists. The program should first identify the  universe and composition of collections. Second, the program should identify collections that have  scientific potential, and then scientists should be strongly encouraged to study these collections.  Third, we should identify gaps/surpluses nationally in the data that currently resides in our national  collections. Fourth, using this data we should develop a national collections policy that encourages  46 

G. [PPE] Public Education & Relevance of Archaeology 

our scientists not to collect data we already have, but more importantly target the gaps. ¶ If we do  this or something like it our discipline will move forward. I am sure of this. Or we can continue to go  to our meetings and hear our students give versions of papers we gave 25 years ago. 

1. [PPE] ID: 212   Challenge: How does archaeology benefit society as a whole? How do we as archaeologists justify  the funding spent on archaeology? If we cannot argue to our challengers that archaeology provides  insights into the past, that if it is not useful in terms of immediate concerns, how then do we at least  overtly demonstrate its benefit to humanity?   Justification: With shrinking funding, an increasingly conservative society and government,  providing an explicit justification of the importance of archaeology is crucial for our survival. If we  are to betaken seriously as an academic discipline, I believe we have to do a better job of translating  what we learn from the past for public consumption.  2. [PPE] ID: 214   Challenge: Funding from the NSF comes from tax dollars. Tax dollars come from citizens. As  anthropologists, archaeologists have to understand the root issues of any problem. Because the root  funding source is Joe/Josephine Citizen, archaeologists should be looking at developing the image of  archaeology as a science. The government and the NSF will be more willing to have money  earmarked for archaeology if archaeology is better marketed as a useful (to the general public)  discipline and as a science.   Justification: Find the number of high schools that teach or present archaeology as a science and  you will see the root of my suggested Grand Challenge issue. 4.7% of the school districts in the  major metropolitan area I live in have anthropology as an elective in their high school curriculum;  0% as a required course. The general public learns about archaeology in the main educational  system (high schools) through a social studies course, a Sociology course, or a Geography course.  Over 80% of our districts have Sociology or Geography as electives. Course learning objectives listed  for these courses rarely list anthropology/archaeology as a topic. So, the public is left to learn about  archaeology through television. TV chooses shows that have "WOW" factors. Often these factors,  while interesting and very cool, leave the average person with the thought that this stuff is only for  people who can speak four languages (two of them dead) or can use militarygrade SCUBA gear. The  grand challenges you are looking for probably do not include something like what I am suggesting.  Your goals appear to be aligned for the scientific community only and therefore assume that  archaeology is an accepted science in the first place. That makes this project meaningful to  (relatively) very few people. Archaeology must make itself known as a meaningful science to many  more people so funding will be more plentiful. A project that helps this endeavor will serve our  discipline the best in the longrun.  3. [PPE] ID: 215   Challenge: How do we make archaeology and what we learn through archaeology more than a  scholarly or legal exercise; one that generates information for the profession or provides the base  necessary for clearance under Section 106? How can what we learn benefit people, descendant  communities, and make a difference globally?   Justification: As individuals, we do archaeology because we like it, because it satisfies our curiosity  of who we are and where we came from, not for how it can benefit communities or improve life.  Most archaeology that is done in the US is done through CRM, with the purpose of clearance for the  agency to proceed with their project. The product of archaeological investigations is a technical  report. How can we get beyond the project and the report? How does what they are doing on a  project relate to other projects? How can information generated by projects be of benefit to  people? How can the knowledge gained through archaeology be made relevant within a global  context? We need to stop taking the doing of archaeology for granted and start thinking beyond.  Part of the solution lies in how archaeologists are trained, part lies in how projects are funded, and  47 

part in the structure of legislative and grant requirements.  4. [PPE] ID: 217   Challenge: The grand challenge for archaeology is to interpret the material record in a socially  meaningful manner for contemporary communities without losing sight of the empirical basis of  analyzes.   Justification: Archaeology is datadriven, formed from archaeological excavations and observations  of the material world. The plentiful insights into the human past and the theoretical insights into the  materiality of our species, past and present, have made fundamental contributions to science and to  contemporary communities. The ability to collaborate with contemporary communities toward  social justice is the moral imperative. While there have been tremendous discussions, the  intersection is still an important problem so that the present generation of scholars can inspire the  next generation.  5. [PPE] ID: 220   Challenge: One 'grand challenge' is to show the public that archaeology is not treasure hunting but  the study of past human activity that is pertinent to themselves. The concept of an historic  landscape is generally not understood by the layperson. Instead, archaeological investigation is  perceived as a means to retrieve artifacts that are of monetary value.   Justification: Everywhere has archaeology, but few realize that where they live is almost certainly  part of an historic landscape. The latter can be diverse: perhaps remains from the infrastructure of a  relict industry or the archaeology of early settlers and the evidence of their toil to create the  villages, towns and cities we have today. ¶ For many, archaeology needs to be dramatic and  immediate; the sudden discovery of gold or finding a lost, legendary, tomb. Such perceptions  alienate the individual from the true purpose of archaeology. There is a need to address this  problem through better public involvement and media exposure.  6. [PPE] ID: 243   Challenge: One of the biggest challenges to archaeology is selling it to the taxpayers and public, but  in a way that doesn't link it to alien invasions or New Age blather, and combatting the concept that  "pot hunting as legitimate archaeology." It needs to be portrayed as a legitimate science that is done  by real scientists who are trained academically and have credentials, just as any other science or  engineering discipline works.   Justification: Taxpayers are the ones that are funding the majority of archaeological projects in this  country, whether they are aware of it or not. This includes CRM, federal grants, projects undertaken  by public universities and entities like the Smithsonian. If we can't sell them on the importance of  "real" archaeology, down the line, in fiscal austerity initiatives, the field will lose out big time. ¶ We  also suffer from an image problem. I have never heard of the general public being too crazy about  having an "amateur doctor" do cancer surgery on their loved ones, but many people have the idea  that going out and digging a hole in the ground somewhere, and then dragging out artifacts, putting  them in a shoebox and then selling them at a collectors festival or on eBay constitutes legitimate  archaeology. ¶ With shows like the ones National Geo just (thankfully) put on hold, this problem is  only going to get bigger. Here in Kentucky, we fought hard and avoided getting a vote this March in  the statehouse that would have allowed metal detector enthusiasts to go "treasure hunting" in our  state historic and prehistoric site parks. Someone will probably resubmit the same legislation or a  similar set of bills next year in legislative session, so this problem won't be going away soon. ¶ We  somehow need instead to convey that archaeology is a legitimate science (hard for a good bit of the  United States population to comprehend, since many believe the world is just a few thousand years  old, and that climate change is a ploy by the liberals to shut down coal mining and drilling for oil by  legislating antipollution regulations). The irony of all this is that these resources are "fossil" fuels   so how in the heck did it get there in the first place, if natural selection and evolution did not create  the prehistoric plants and creatures that formed the oil and coal deposits? ¶ I firmly believe that  educating the public about the legitimacy of archaeology as a science worthy of funding, and respect  48 

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

for preservation of archaeological resources are two of the most important issues confronting our  field.  [PPE] ID: 252   Challenge: Making archaeology relevant among the general public, lawmakers, and general  populace. Often archaeology is seen as not being relevant or contributing to our current lives.   Justification: In order for archaeology survive and avoid severe budget cuts, we need to have a  public that is willing to advocate for archaeology and make sure that is survives attempts to remove  it from funding and legislative oversight. In addition, universities need to continue to teach  archaeology and promote why such work is important in the 20th century.  [PPE] ID: 258   Challenge: How to inform the public and provide them with detail of their past  direct or indirect   without having them take over the agenda by, for example, metal detecting because it 'is their past'.   Justification: Getting increasingly important as potential archaeological sites are destroyed by  treasure seekers and materials are lost to academic enquiry.  [PPE] ID: 259   Challenge: Archeological relevance or what have we learned from the thousands of projects and  collections generated that will help define the issues facing our modern society.   Justification: We have spent untold tens of thousands on Section 106 inventory and mitigation, and  in research projects that have resulted in a developing curation crisis, largely unused reports, and  promises that our bits of information gleaned from fieldwork may someday result in a finding a  piece of some puzzle that may tell us something about the past. We need to be much more relevant  in confirming the past, utilizing research, and in helping to solve the problems that vex society  today.  [PPE] ID: 284   Challenge: The greatest challenge to American Archaeology is making our field of study relevant to  the general public.   Justification: In an era of government cutbacks and economic distress, our greatest challenge is  finding a way to make our discipline more relevant to the general public. Why should the public care  about funding our research when unemployment is high and there are families struggling to provide  basic needs? Funding for research is tight right now, and we need to find new ways to engage the  voting public before they decide that our field is not important enough to waste their public funds to  support. ¶ I highly encourage the support of new public education programs in archaeology  we  need to find new and exciting ways to capture public interest.  [PPE] ID: 300   Challenge: A recent problem, which will likely grow with time if not addressed, is the popularizing of  artifact "hunting" through reality shows and magazine articles. The SAA should develop short films  or interviews with archaeologists that popularize the value of documentation and working with  professional archaeologists. While this may not be a "major scientific challenge" it would be a way of  protecting a limited resource for professional research, while including nonprofessionals.   Justification:  [PPE] ID: 324   Challenge: to align archaeological research and all the wonderful information it provides on past  peoples with modern human problems, useful ideas, and PRACTICAL solutions, and educate both  the general public and policymakers and governments to its amazing potential. For example,  archaeologists could contribute tremendously to climate change studies, not only in learning past  processes and human responses but also in proposing some solutions for today based on that past  knowledge. In other words, we should move from knowledge to wisdom (see book of same title)  and make archaeology both exciting research and applied anthropology.   Justification:  [PPE] ID: 330  49 

14.

15.

16.

17.

Challenge: The grand challenge of archaeology for me concerns public education and perception.  Generally we are like all the rest of the sciences in that we need to do a better job of explaining  what science is and how we contribute to society. More specifically, we need some way to convey to  the general public that archaeology is not about simply about gold and pyramids and not about  dinosaurs at all. I like dinosaurs (and who doesn't?) but that's not archaeology.   Justification: I have spent most of my 20 year career in archaeology in CRM, both as a field  archaeologist and now behind a desk. The challenges listed above have been some of the basic  issues I have dealt with on a consistent basis throughout this time. What is archaeology? Why you  don't need to have a pyramid to have an archaeological site. We don't study dinosaurs. We are not  Indiana Jones. I know you are probably looking for something about the peopling of the Western  Hemisphere, approaches to preClovis and possible Late Pleistocene connections with Western  Europe, etc... but this is all too academic for me. I can't tell you how many times I have been faced  with the following statement, "Why should we have to do archaeological survey, we all know  Indians lived here." The grand challenge for me, then, is a very fundamental issue of public  education and perception of what we study, what we do, and why.  [PPE] ID: 331   Challenge: gaining public support   Justification: based on the relationship archaeologists and communities have  [PPE] ID: 334   Challenge: For many years, anthropology and archaeology viewed "applied" approaches as  somehow compromising the field and appropriate only for those less well schooled. Anthropological  archaeology needs to project its knowledge base of what has already been learned about the past  and suggest ways that our research can address issues of sustainability and resilience today. A major  challenge.   Justification:  [PPE] ID: 370   Challenge: Our greatest problem is gaining broad support for scientific archaeology from the public  at large.   Justification: Current and future mass communication is increasingly focused on sensationalistic  aspects of many endeavors, including archaeology. Our goals and methods will be misunderstood  and we will lack support to go forward with scientific investigations unless we address this problem  with comprehensive programs to communicate with the broader public.  [PPE] ID: 375   Challenge: One the the toughest challenges facing archaeology is that we lack the ability to justify  why the past matters in contemporary society.   Justification: Archaeologists and other historiographical experts take for granted that the artifacts,  sites, buildings, and information from the past MATTER in contemporary society. But in the United  States, and to some degree across the globe, we are not very good at demonstrating that takenfor granted assumption. As a result archaeologists are seen as obstructionists, as antidevelopment, and  caring more about the past than the present, and as not RELEVENT. Our funding and public support  is diminishing accordingly, and more importantly, the results of our work our languishing on shelves,  in museums, on computers. We need social science dataquantitative and qualitativeto  demonstrate that the past DOES matter for things like ontological security, for psychological well  being, as conflict resolution, and even for such challenges as global warming. As social scientists we  should be able to demonstrate this if we work with other social scientists and other  historiographical fields, such as history. Archaeology is only one way to access and interpret "the  past," such that the goal should be to promote an appreciate for and conservation of collective  memory, with archaeology as one tool with which to do that.



50 

Grand Challenges for Archaeology ­ Respondent Demographics1 
SECTOR Consulting Academic Avocational Archaeology Government Museum Student Total ---------------------------------------------------------------------------79 5 56 25 8 4 177 RESIDENCE Australia Canada Europe Mesoamerica South America US Total ----------------------------------------------------------------------4 6 22 3 3 139 177 AGE 30-49 50 or older Under 30 Total -------------------------------------57 117 3 177 GENDER Female Male Total --------------------68 109 177

RESIDENCE(rows) by SECTOR(columns) ¦ Consulting ¦ Academic Avocational Archaeology Government Museum Student Total --------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------Australia ¦ 3 0 1 0 0 0 4 Canada ¦ 3 1 1 0 0 1 6 Europe ¦ 8 0 7 5 2 0 22 Mesoamerica ¦ 3 0 0 0 0 0 3 South America ¦ 2 0 1 0 0 0 3 US ¦ 60 4 46 20 6 3 139 --------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------Total ¦ 79 5 56 25 8 4 177 AGE(rows) by SECTOR(columns) ¦ Consulting ¦ Academic Avocational Archaeology Government Museum Student Total ------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------30-49 ¦ 24 2 15 11 2 3 57 50 or older ¦ 54 3 39 14 6 1 117 Under 30 ¦ 1 0 2 0 0 0 3 ------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------Total ¦ 79 5 56 25 8 4 177 GENDER(rows) by SECTOR(columns) ¦ Consulting ¦ Academic Avocational Archaeology Government Museum Student Total -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------Female ¦ 34 1 22 6 2 3 68 Male ¦ 45 4 34 19 6 1 109 -------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------Total ¦ 79 5 56 25 8 4 177 AGE(rows) by RESIDENCE(columns) ¦ Australia Canada Europe Mesoamerica South America US Total ------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------30-49 ¦ 0 1 12 1 2 41 57 50 or older ¦ 4 5 9 2 1 96 117 Under 30 ¦ 0 0 1 0 0 2 3 ------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------Total ¦ 4 6 22 3 3 139 177 GENDER(rows) by RESIDENCE(columns) ¦ Australia Canada Europe Mesoamerica South America US Total -------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------Female ¦ 3 1 9 2 2 51 68 Male ¦ 1 5 13 1 1 88 109 -------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------Total ¦ 4 6 22 3 3 139 177 GENDER(rows) by AGE(columns) ¦ 30-49 50 or older Under 30 Total -------+--------------------------------------Female ¦ 25 41 2 68 Male ¦ 32 76 1 109 -------+--------------------------------------Total ¦ 57 117 3 177
1

 Responses through 30 June 2012. 

51 

Grand Challenges for Archaeology ­ Survey Instrument

52 

Identifying Grand Challenges in Archaeology
This NSF-funded research project seeks to identify a suite of "grand challenge" problems of broad scientific and social interest that can drive cutting-edge research in archaeology for the next decade and beyond. We are soliciting discipline-wide consideration of these challenges in order to determine what investments in computational infrastructure by the US National Science Foundation (NSF) would be most likely to effect scalar transformations of our ability to address major problems in archaeology, and in science more broadly. The results of this effort will be published and disseminated on the Web. "Grand challenge" is a term used to mean "a fundamental problem in science or engineering."* For example, in archaeology a grand challenge might be: "Understanding the origin, timing, routes, and demographic dynamics of the peopling of the Americas." In this sense, grand challenges would not include disciplinary challenges with respect to the practice of archaeology, such as changes in financial and legal frameworks. While the current project will use the grand challenges identified here to argue for investment in computational infrastructure, others may find them useful in arguing for funding, policy, or other changes. This first stage of the research seeks professional perspectives on the major scientific challenges facing the discipline. Following a synthesis of the results, we will return to the community to rank the challenges that emerge most clearly from this initial call. Two project workshops will then explore the data and modeling requirements of highly ranked grand challenge problems to develop a formal argument for major NSF investments in computational infrastructure for archaeology. Computational infrastructure includes improved data acquisition tools for the field and laboratory, digitization of existing data, documents, and reference collections, improved ability to discover, access, and integrate digital data and documents, tools to facilitate modeling and visualization, and training and community building necessary to exploit this infrastructure. The survey generally takes from 2 to 10 minutes and is completely anonymous; no personal identifying information will be associated with the individual responses. No benefit or disadvantage will accrue to respondents, from NSF or any other entity. You may exit the survey at any time; answers are not recorded until you press the "next " (>>) button at the end of the survey. Questions about the survey can be directed to Keith Kintigh (principal investigator; kintigh@asu.edu). If you have any questions about your rights as a participant in this research, or if you feel you have been placed at risk, you can contact the Chair of the Human Subjects Institutional Review Board, through the ASU Office of Research Integrity and Assurance, at (480) 965-6788. The project steering committee thanks you in advance for your participation. Keith Kintigh, Arizona State University Ann Kinzig, Arizona State University William Michener, University of New Mexico Jeffrey Altschul, Statistical Research, Inc., and SRI Foundation W. Frederick Limp, University of Arkansas Jeremy Sabloff, Santa Fe Institute

*A Research and Development Strategy for High Performance Computing,Office of Science and Technology Policy, November 20, 1987.

By selecting Continue I acknowledge that I am at least 18 years old and that I voluntarily agree to participate in this study. Please press the >> button at the bottom right of the window to proceed. Continue Exit Survey

Survey
Your answers may be used as is or edited, in reports generated by the project. Because the survey is anonymous, we cannot provide attribution of any content contributed. You may cut and paste text into the query fields if you wish. Concise statement of a grand challenge problem or question (suggested limit: 40 words; survey limit: 700 characters, about 100 words):

Concise background and justification of the importance of the problem or question (optional; suggested limit: 200 words; survey limit 7000 characters, about 1000 words).

Optional Demographic Information
This Information will allow us to assess the general sources and representativeness of the responses. Primary Professional Work Setting (if retired, please choose what you would consider to be your primary pre-retirement work setting)? Consulting Archaeology

Academic

Avocational

Government

Museum

Student

Resident of? South America

US

Africa

Asia

Australia

Canada

Europe

Mesoamerica

Other

Age? Under 30 30-49 50 or older

Gender? Male Female

Save the Completed Survey
Thank you for offering your grand challenge. If you would like to suggest another challenge, please finish and then retake the survey. To receive a report on the results of the survey, please provide your email address. Your email address will not be associated with your answers to any questions above, and will only be used in communications directly associated with this project, including a possible request to participate in a followup survey to prioritize the challenges identified in this survey.

Please click on the Next button (>>, below) button to save your completed survey.

